Italian white truffles: On the hunt in the hills of Tuscany
(CNN) — On a misty Italian morning, we crunch our way through green-yellow undergrowth as Pepe the dog darts on ahead, nose close to the sandy soil.
His tail twitches as he catches the scent.
Looking first to his owner, he jabs with his paws, earth shooting into the air as he gets closer to the prize.
I'm in the Tuscan town of San Miniato for the November "gold rush," when the Italian white truffle comes into season.
This rare white fungus is as fabled as Moby Dick, and just as elusive.
That truffle emotion
"The truffle is an emotion. It's not a product, it's not a taste," explains my guide Massimo Cucchiara, who's from a family of truffle hunters that reaches back three generations.
"It's an emotion when you find it. It's an emotion when you eat it. I still remember my first truffle like I remember my first kiss."
Massimo's garlicky scented mistress grows underground, close to the roots of oak, hazel, poplar and beech trees, and is only found in a handful of places around the world.
It's this rarity that makes it so prized.
Truffles are one of the world's most expensive foods and the Italian white is the most valuable of all, with a market price of up to €4,000 ($4,400) per kilo.
Like that heady first embrace, it's impossible to reproduce.
"It's nature that decides it," he explains. "We can't cultivate the truffle."
The San Miniato Hills, with their mild Tuscan climate and soil rich in mineral salts, are the perfect breeding ground for top-quality truffles -- as well as the wine and olive oil for which the region is famous.
Beware of imposters
The rarity and expense of the true white truffle means imposters are rife.
Chances are, if you've tasted white truffle you've been eating chemically enhanced tuber borchii -- an inferior Italian truffle similar in appearance but incomparable in taste.
The second-rate truffle is sprayed with a harsh artificial aroma that mimics the smell and taste.
"When I go into the restaurant and I get that smell I don't eat the truffle dish," says Massimo.
As for truffle oil -- most commercial oils are synthetic gloop unworthy of washing Pepe's paws.
"When you eat the pasta with the truffle oil you don't taste it with your mouth, you taste it with your nose."
The gentle, earthy taste of Italian white truffle is too subtle to be preserved in oil or cheese or meat.
Striking gold
Massimo's father, Salvatore, kneels down to unearth our first find of the day, brushing at the soil with his fingers with all the care of an archeologist on a dig.
It's a 25-gram golden-brown beauty, worth up to $100.
Its firm texture, umber hue and marbled white-brown interior revealed along a nibbled edge all point to its freshness and ripeness.
Then there's the gentle, earthy musk, which builds as it warms in the hand.
When eaten, "the taste is delicate in your mouth," says Massimo. "The smell though, you could smell for days."