Diverse Minorities in Massachusetts Mill Town Struggle for Representation
WASHINGTON — Lowell, a Massachusetts mill town known as the birthplace of the American Industrial Revolution, has recovered from a steep economic decline during the mid-20th century and is now a thriving and diverse melting pot, where members of ethnic and racial minorities are almost a majority of the population.
Despite this demographic shift, all six school committee members and nine city councilors are white, which doesn’t sit well with the many residents who are not.
In May, 13 plaintiffs representing Asian-American and Hispanic voters filed a federal lawsuit alleging that Lowell’s at-large electoral system discriminated against them and people from their communities running for city offices.
The court's decision is not expected for at least a year, but the Lowell City Council is holding a special meeting June 27 with one item on the agenda: How should the city respond to the lawsuit? Should Lowell try to fight the suit in court, or place a referendum on the November election ballot asking voters whether they want to change or retain the at-large voting process?
The lawsuit asks the federal court to rule that Lowell's current voting system violates the U.S. Voting Rights Act, and to order the city to change to a system where votes by members of minority groups are not "improperly diluted,” said Oren Sellstrom, litigation director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights and Economic Justice.
“This lack of representation has profound impact on the community whose voices are not being heard,” Sellstrom told VOA Khmer. The suit alleges that impact extends to employment opportunities for members of the underrepresented groups.
Citywide voting only since 1957
Lowell now has the second-largest Cambodian-American community in the United States. The city implemented citywide or at-large district voting — also known as a winner-take-all electoral system — in 1957, shifting away from a system where voters chose candidates from separate lists in each ward.
Nationwide, at-large voting systems have faced criticism because candidates from varying social, racial and economic groups must compete against each other.
The Lowell lawsuit is similar to an earlier case that overturned winner-take-all voting in another Massachusetts city, Springfield. Supporters say both efforts belong to the long tradition of Americans fighting for equality in voting rights.
The Voting Rights Act signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson in August 1965 is considered one of the most significant pieces of civil-rights legislation ever enacted in the United States.
The law prohibiting racial discrimination in voting has been reviewed and argued over frequently during the past half-century, and Congress has amended it five times. Complaints filed to the U.S. Department of Justice over the years have centered on disputes between majority and minority communities in the nation — struggles that often play out as a contest between those who have privileges, power and wealth, and those who do not.
The Lowell lawsuit singles out a section of the Voting Rights Act that specifically prohibits state and local governments from using voting systems that result in discrimination against racial or ethnic minorities.
