Premier League gauges interest in safe standing by sending a questionnaire to all 20 clubs including Liverpool

Premier League has written to all teams asking their opinions on safe standing
Standing has been outlawed in the top two divisions since 1990's Taylor Report
Should safe standing be allowed clubs will not be forced in to introducing it 
Scottish champions Celtic unveiled rail-seating for 2,600 fans last season
IAN HERBERT: Liverpool fans's support shows it's time to consider safe standing 
By Mike Keegan For The Daily Mail
PUBLISHED: 22:31 BST, 21 June 2017 | UPDATED: 23:51 BST, 21 June 2017

The Premier League has written to all its clubs — including Liverpool — to see if they would be interested in piloting safe standing.
In what could be a significant step, the clubs have also been asked for their thoughts on the issue as part of a wide-ranging consultation.
Standing was outlawed in the top two divisions after the 1990 Taylor Report, commissioned following the 1989 Hillsborough Disaster in which 96 Liverpool fans died.
Liverpool fans' group Spirit of Shankly have launched a consultation on safe standing
However, the questionnaire, seen by Sportsmail and sent to all PL club secretaries, is the strongest indication yet that a return to standing areas may be on the cards.
Calls for the facility have been made by various fans’ groups for a number of years but the issue remains emotive on Merseyside, with the Hillsborough Family Support Group firmly opposed. However, the Liverpool fans’ group Spirit of Shankly launched a consultation on the matter and the Hillsborough Justice Campaign have said it also supports a full debate.
The new survey attempts to address the issue of fans persistently standing and asks if clubs would be willing to pilot a standing area.
Celtic introduced rail-seating for 2,600 supporters at Parkhead in a move viewed as a success
Celtic's safe standing section was used for the first time in a pre-season game in July 2016
The Premier League declined to comment on the survey but are known to be neutral on the issue and pointed out that it is still an exploratory stage.
Should safe standing be allowed, clubs will not be forced to introduce it. Celtic unveiled rail-seating for 2,600 fans at Parkhead last season and the move is seen as a success.
Advocates say safe standing areas improve the atmosphere, do not carry the risks of the old terraces and, potentially, can make going to games more affordable.
Some believe that providing an area where fans can stand could improve safety levels.
WHAT IS SAFE STANDING? 
Rail seats are the most popular form of safe standing. Each fan stands behind a waist-high safety barrier to prevent surging or crushing. A fold-out seat is attached to each rail.
When rail seating is used for games where standing is permitted, supporters are given a designated ‘seat’ but the seat itself can be locked upright. For UEFA matches, which must be all-seater, stadium staff can simply unlock the seats and unfold them.
Each seat costs around £80.
The Premier League initially raised the issue in November and the current survey is part of a feasibility study.
A Premier League spokesman said: ‘Clubs tasked us with scoping out the safety, supporter, technical and legislative issues surrounding standing before further discussions, based on facts.’
Whether a change in law would be needed is one of many elements being examined but the Department for Culture, Media and Sport seems sceptical. A spokesman said: ‘The government has no plans to introduce standing accommodation at grounds covered by the all-seater requirement.’


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-4626772/Premier-League-gauges-clubs-safe-standing.html#ixzz4khbpO6q7 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
