Heatwave price war! Aldi launches cheap-as-chips summerwear that looks VERY similar to designer brands - but can YOU tell which is which?

Low-cost German supermarket is offering a cut-price summer capsule wardrobe 
Budget chain has clearly taken its inspiration from more expensive summerwear 
Sunhat with writing on brim retails for under a fiver - but mimics a £380 version
By Jo Tweedy For Mailonline
PUBLISHED: 16:13 BST, 21 June 2017 | UPDATED: 16:30 BST, 21 June 2017

Budget supermarket Aldi has unleashed a heatwave wardrobe, offering its own take on more expensive summerwear designs.
The German cut-price groceries goliath has launched a series of hats, shorts, sandals and dresses that look remarkably similar to items already on the high street. 
There's a £6.99 sun hat that carries a scrawl on its wide brim reading: 'sun, sea and sand', which bears an uncanny likeness to Eugenia Kim's designer 'Talk to the sand' sunhat, currently retailing at £380.00.
Eugenia Kim's glam sequined 'Talk to the sand' sun hat will set you back £380 
Aldi has clearly taken inspiration from the hat handwriting with this £3.99 offering...no sequins included
Best foot forward: A pair of Aldi sandals offers change from a tenner. Meanwhile, high quality sandal brand Birkenstock's Arizona version is shinier - and at £75, more expensive
The lines may tremor a little more but this striped Aldi maxi dress (left, £7.99, isn't a million miles away from the John Lewis alternative, which costs £55
A navy and white-striped summer maxi dress is a breezy £7.99 and doesn't look dissimilar to a John Lewis alternative that would ring through the til at £55. 
And a £9.99 silver comfort sandal does a good impression of Birkenstock's £75 silver Arizona version. 
The range, which includes a menswear and ladieswear range, includes palm tree beach shorts for men at £4.99, undercutting M&S' similar design by nearly £7. 
The chain, which has become famous for its ability to offer designs coveted by the middle classes at purse-friendly prices, says its looked to the high street for inspiration.
Denim shorts: Aldi's lace version with a frill trim will set you back £6.99, while an embroidered pair at Moto for Topshop costs £29
Menswear: Swimshorts from the cut-price supermarket is priced at £4.99 Dolce & Gabbana's print bermuda in navy costs £87 
Shirt wars: Aldi have an £8.99 take on Superdry's ghost button down shirt. The popular high street brand sells its version for £45
Classic chino shorts will ring the till at £6.99 and would be hard to distinguish in a line-up from Zara's £29.99 tan bermuda short
Tony Baines, Managing Director for Corporate Buying at Aldi comments: 'As temperatures creep up and sun seekers look to update their wardrobes, we’ve tapped in to the latest high-street trends to offer our customers a great-value fashion range that doesn’t compromise on style.'
In May, the brand made a statement of intent when it comes to summer gadgets, offering a portable drinks cooler, which works in much the same way as a mini fridge, except it comes on wheels and often has a much larger capacity for wine, for more than £200 less than the nearest rival product. 
The cooler will usually set you back nearly £400 - but Aldi has released a £179.99 cut-price version.


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-4625332/Aldi-launches-cut-price-heatwave-wardrobe.html#ixzz4khW78lmA 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
