PIERS MORGAN: Finsbury Park is just what ISIS wants. It’s what the Far Right Islamophobes want. And it’s up to the rest of us to fight the hate and lies from both

By Piers Morgan for MailOnline
PUBLISHED: 16:23 BST, 19 June 2017 | UPDATED: 16:34 BST, 19 June 2017
Another day, another terror attack in Britain.
They are happening with such frequency now that the country is in danger of becoming almost weary with terror fatigue.
But what happened in Finsbury Park in the early hours of this morning is something that should horrify all of us just as much as the wicked slaughter of young Adriana Grande concert-goers in Manchester or people having a pint in Borough Market.
For it signified the moment many had feared; the moment white, anti-Muslim extremists exacted twisted, warped ‘revenge’ on innocent fellow Britons.	
Police are pictured helping casualties at the scene of the suspected terror attack in Finsbury Park this morning 
After each of the recent Islamist terror attacks in Britain, I made a plea for all decent, law-abiding Muslims to do more to root out extremists radicalised in the midst of their communities.
Today, I make the exact same plea to those sections of the white, non-Muslim communities that are harbouring or tolerating people with the same hateful ideology of the man who mowed down 11 people as they left a prayer meeting.
Let’s not pretend that this kind of extremism does not exist, or is any more acceptable than that espoused by ISIS.
Murder is murder.
Maiming is maiming.
Hate is hate.
Bigotry is bigotry.
The Muslims so cruelly killed and wounded this morning deserved their fate no more than any other victims of the terrorism blighting Britain.
And there will be more horrific attacks like this unless we now urgently tackle the escalation in white, Islamophobic extremism that is being fuelled, like Islamist terrorism, by widely available hateful online material.
Within minutes of the news breaking, notorious Islamophobe Tommy Robinson, former frontman for the English Defence League, tweeted this: ‘The mosque where the attack happened tonight has a long history of creating terrorists and radical jihadists and promoting hate and segregation.’
His subliminal message was clear: they deserved it.
Not for the first time, Robinson was not just incredibly offensive, he was factually wrong.
He was referring to the Finsbury Park Mosque, of hate preacher Abu Hamza infamy at the turn of the century, but a place that has since been successfully transformed into the very model of a peace-espousing community mosque.
It wasn’t the Finsbury Park Mosque that was attacked though, it was the Muslim Welfare House half a mile away - where worshippers, with cruel irony, had spent much of the weekend celebrating the life and humanity of murdered MP Jo Cox a year ago.
As fury erupted at his grotesque comment, Robinson responded: ‘Before people start aiming hate or threats at me about this revenge attack at your mosque tonight, I’ve warned you for yrs what u will create.’
This has been Robinson’s long-time default position whenever people accuse him of Islamophobia.
He insists he is not actually advocating any violence towards Muslims, he is merely warning it will happen.
Robinson is a popular online persona, regularly posting anti-Islam rants on YouTube when he’s not giving anti-Islam speeches around the world.	
Former English Defence League leader Tommy Robinson has been criticised for his comments in the wake of the Finsbury Park attack	
He wrongly said that the mosque where it happened 'has a long history of creating terrorists' 	
He also called the incident a 'revenge attack' and said he had warned that it would happen
He insists he’s a man of peace who doesn’t hate all Muslims.
Yet the truth is he’s a man of violence who is on the record blaming all Muslims for Islamist terrorism.
Robinson’s not even his real name. He was born Stephen Yaxley-Lennon but uses the alias ‘Tommy Robinson’ after an infamous leader of Luton Town’s “Men In Gear” football hooligan mob.
For many years, Robinson himself ran the same firm.
In 2010, he was involved in a 100-man brawl between supporters of Luton Town and Newport County. He was reported to have led Luton’s hooligans in the melee, repeatedly chanting ‘EDL till I die.’ He was convicted of having used ‘threatening, abusive or insulting behaviour’, and given a 12-month community rehabilitation order and a three-year ban from attending football matches.
This was one of a string of criminal convictions he has for violence.	
Piers Morgan is calling on white, non-white Britons to condemn hateful ideology against Muslims
Robinson served a 12-month prison sentence for a drunken assault on an off-duty police officer, and he was found guilty of common assault after head-butting a fellow EDL member at a rally in Blackburn.
So, Robinson’s most definitely a violent man.
But it’s his comments about Muslims and Islam that are far more disturbing.
Go onto his beloved YouTube and you will find a well-viewed clip of him addressing an EDL rally at Tower Hamlets in 2011.
‘We are here today,’ he tells a rowdy crowd, ‘to tell you quite loud and quite clear, every single Muslim watching this video on YouTube: on 7/7 you got away with killing and maiming British citizens. You got away with it. Next time you think about it, you’d better understand that we have built a network from one end of this country to the other end. We will not tolerate it. And the Islamic community will feel the full force of the EDL if we see any of our citizens killed, maimed or hurt on British soil ever again.’
There is no equivocation in this statement, no attempt to disseminate peaceful, law-abiding Muslims from Islamist terrorists.
Robinson’s just lumping all Muslims together as one big threat to Britain that needs to be neutralised.
In other rants, he has called Islam a fascist and violent religion, a ‘disease’ and a ‘threat to our way of life.’ Not Islamist terrorism, note, but Islam itself.
After Lee Rigby’s killing, he said: ‘They’re chopping our soldiers’ heads off. This is Islam. Our next generation of children are being taught through schools that Islam is a religion of peace. It’s not. It never has been. What you saw today is Islam. Everyone’s had enough. There has to be a reaction for the government to listen, for the police to listen, to understand how angry this British public are.’
More recently, Robinson posted a video of himself saying of Islamist terrorism: ‘If we don’t get this matter dealt with, then the British public will. They will end up taking matters into their own hands. Militias will be set up and the UK government will have a problem beyond their wildest dreams…the creation of a disgruntled, angry population who will end up cleaning out this Islamic problem. UK government will then have a massive extremist problem.’
Not ‘this Islamist terrorism problem’ but ‘this Islamic problem.’
There’s a difference; a very big difference.	
This is the aftermath of a scene after a white van ploughed into a group of Muslim worshippers close to the north London mosque
Robinson’s not the only one out there preaching this kind of dangerous hateful bile.
Social media has been swamped with similar garbage from white Islamophobes in the past few months, capitalising on the fear caused by recent terror attacks.
Just like the Islamist terror preacher rants, this stuff spreads like wildfire, and it gets into impressionable minds very fast.
We don’t know what motivated last night’s murderer to do what he did. That will doubtless emerge in his trial.
Multiple eyewitness reports say he was heard shouting ‘I want to kill all Muslims’ and was seen celebrating after he was arrested and boasting: ‘I did my bit.’
Perhaps he thought he was helping defeat ISIS with his actions.
Yet all he has achieved with his disgusting rampage is giving ISIS exactly what it most craves – the spectacle of a Western society apparently at war with itself over Islam.
That apocalyptic concept must never prevail.
The Islamophobic hate preaching of the likes of Tommy Robinson must never prevail.
Britain is not at war with Muslims; Britain is at war with Islamist terrorists abusing Islam to justify their atrocities.
That distinction may have been lost on the Finsbury Park terrorist.
But it must not be lost on the rest of us. 


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4618474/PIERS-MORGAN-Finsbury-Park-just-ISIS-wants.html#ixzz4kXKU3Syb 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
