Mumford & Sons close Arroyo Seco Weekend with joyful sounds for happy fans
Mumford & Sons perform during Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Sunday, June 25, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)
Mumford & Sons perform during Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Sunday, June 25, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG) 
By Peter Larsen, The Orange County Register
POSTED: 06/26/17, 11:01 AM PDT | UPDATED: 13 HRS AGO 0 COMMENTS
Mumford & Sons perform during Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Sunday, June 25, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)
Mumford & Sons perform during Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Sunday, June 25, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG) 
Marcus Mumford looked out at the still-sprawling crowd at Arroyo Seco Weekend as the English rock band he leads reached the penultimate song of its festival-closing set, and sweaty and happy like the fans on the field invite everyone to come along with Mumford & Sons for the finish.

“Let’s have a (bleepin’) dance, shall we?” Mumford shouted. The band struck up the opening notes of “I Will Wait,” one of its biggest hits, and everyone rallied to oblige.

It was a fun finale for this inaugural festival held on the grounds around the Rose Bowl, with Mumford & Sons the perfect capper to a weekend of strong performances.

•Related: These photos show you what it’s like to be at Arroyo Seco Weekend

Opening with “Snake Eyes,” off its most recent album, 2015’s “Wilder Mind,” the band’s blend of traditional folk sounds -- mandolin, fiddle, banjo -- with the standard rock instrumentation was as winning as ever, the music making for a happy, uplifting feelings even when the lyrics at times deal with sorrow and loss.

“Little Lion Man,” the 2009 hit that introduced Mumford & Sons to listeners, followed, and it already felt like a more joyful night than that of the Saturday headlining turn by Tom Petty & the Heartbreakers. No disrespect to Petty and Co., for they played their songs impeccably -- and they’re wonderful songs at that.

•Related: Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers deliver the hits to a packed crowd

But Mumford is a more naturally personable front man than Petty, quicker to engage the audience, more revealing of how excited he and his band mates were to be performing. (Then again, the fact that the crowds that annoyed me so on Saturday felt a bit less claustrophobic on Sunday might also have played a role here.)

Other highlights early in the set included “White Blank Page,” which opened with lovely harmony vocals before building to a rousing close, and “Thistle & Weed,” another from the band’s more traditional folk-influenced debut album, “Sigh No More.”

“I was born a few miles down the road,” Mumford said at one point earlier on, referencing his birth in Anaheim when his parents were temporarily living the States. “In many ways for me, but also for our band,” this feels like home, so thanks for creating that for us.”

•Related: The good, the bad and the weird of Arroyo Seco Weekend

He introduced “Blind Leading The Blind” as a new song, presumably slated for the next album, and dedicated its message of needing to make human connections among ourselves, to the people of London, beset as he noted by terror and tragedy of late.


As the main set neared its finish “The Cave” arrived a perfect number for the crowd to clap and sing along, while “Dust Bowl Dance” closed off this part of the show amid a shower of sparks from the minimal pyrotechnics allowed in this dry setting.

The encore opened with “Cold Arms,” Mumford and the band doing it as acoustic as anyone can for a crowd this large, huddled around a microphone to sing its harmony vocals while he played acoustic guitar. “I Will Wait” did as he requested -- turned to field into a throng of dancing, skipping, and the last song -- “The Wolf,” if I’m not mistaken -- sent everyone home, happy, tired, fulfilled.