After fighting for her daughter's life, mom fears GOP health care bill
(CNN)She's a 35-pound bundle of blonde cuteness with hard-working parents.

"We're not deadbeats," said Rebecca Wood, 38, who lives with her husband and daughter in Charlottesville, Virginia.
Wood has a message for Republican lawmakers in Washington who have proposed dramatic cuts to Medicaid: Families like hers are deserving and need help, not slashed funding.
Wood's daughter, Charlie, was born more than three months early, weighing just one pound and 12 ounces. While she's now 5 years old and doing well, she suffers from complications of her extreme prematurity. She still gets most of her calories through a feeding tube in her stomach.
Wood and her husband have expensive medical bills as a result of these complications.
With the help of Medicaid, Charlie has made great strides. Forty percent of US children are on Medicaid.
After five grueling years, her parents now have confidence that she will realize their dream for her: to grow up to become an independent adult.
But if the Republican health care plans succeed, they worry that dream could die.
"There are these men, just far away from everything, snatching it out from under her," she said.
Changing Congress
Arriving early for an appointment with her congressman in May, Rebecca Wood paced the streets of Capitol Hill to calm her nerves.
A few weeks before, on May 4, Virginia Republican Tom Garrett had voted for the American Health Care Act, a plan Wood thinks could endanger her daughter.
As she walked, Wood tried to gather the courage to confront Garrett and a yard sign along her path gave her confidence.
It was a quote from the anthropologist Margaret Mead: "Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it's the only thing that ever has."
Now the stay-at-home mom was ready to tell her story to her congressman.
Charlie's story
When Wood was six months pregnant, she started to see spots. It was the onset of preeclampsia, a disease that can kill mother and child.
Wood's blood pressure soared causing doctors at Inova Fairfax Hospital in Falls Church, Virginia, to deliver Charlie at 26 weeks -- 14 weeks early -- to save both of their lives.
After the delivery, Wood went straight to the intensive care unit, her kidneys and liver suffering terribly. Deluded by her disease and the drugs to treat it, she tried to unplug her monitors so she could get to Charlie.
Wood wasn't healthy enough to see her daughter for another two days.
Her husband wheeled her to the neonatal intensive care unit where she looked down into the isolette at her 1-pound, 8-ounce baby and promptly burst into tears.
"I was afraid she wasn't going to survive. It terrified me that this was it," she said.
"I watched you fight and I cheered you on," she would write later in her blog. "On your difficult days, I prayed and begged. Sometimes you would forget to breathe. I gently nudged you as a reminder."
Charlie was discharged after three months in the hospital, though her growth and development lagged behind other babies. She still suffers from delays in speech and fine motor development and is vulnerable to infections, like pneumonia.
Her mother, however, was undaunted.