From small beginnings.
by Mike Mahardy on September 30, 2015

Uncharted: The Nathan Drake Collection is a history lesson on a grand scale. It weaves through maps, journals, and diary entries long separated from their ancient authors, in abandoned ruins across the world. But this collection also delves into the series' own dark recesses, highlighting the progress developer Naughty Dog made from the first Uncharted to the third. There is brilliance in this collection. But there are hints of mediocrity as well.

It begins with the first entry in the series, Uncharted: Drake's Fortune, which shipped in 2007. This marks our first moment with its hero, Nathan Drake. He's since become a video game icon, but eight years ago, he was Naughty Dog's first departure from the affable Jak and Daxter. At the time, Drake had yet to prove his worth.

The Uncharted series combines third-person action, cover-based shooting, and cinematic storytelling. Throughout its three installments, we've followed our hero across deserts, between mountains, and underground through ancient tombs. Each title is replete with action-oriented set pieces, from Uncharted 2's perilous train intro to Uncharted 3's premature plane evacuation.
Drake's movements are floaty and imprecise. The cover mechanic places me in danger far too often. Climbing sequences leave little room for error, often leading to death for unknown reasons. There are even rare storytelling missteps: the entire middle section of the game is devoid of much meaningful character progression, opting instead for imprecise jetski treks against the jungle's raging rivers. Furthermore, at the perceived death of his closest friend, Drake allows himself a single gasp, before his mourning is displaced by excitement for another adventure. He's smiling ten minutes later, laughing as he looks into the sunset toward the next "X" on the map.

Wading through Drake's first outing means suffering constant frustrations. But in the end, it's worth playing, because of what its story leads to: Uncharted 2: Among Thieves, a fantastic sequel successfully modernized by improved cosmetics and smoother aiming controls. Naughty Dog's characters show real complexity here, and their relationships shift, align, and resettle as the story takes haphazard turns.
The developer has compiled a singular story arc leading into the fourth chapter, and revamped it for modern visual palates. Like the best stories, those of Uncharted and its characters have changed over time. The Nathan Drake Collection smooths out the crinkled pages, clarifies the memories, and buffs all the right details in the retelling of this storied series.
At various times throughout the Uncharted games, our protagonist carries the ring of Francis Drake on a leather band around his neck. The ring's inscription reads: "Sic Parvus Magna," or, "greatness from small beginnings."

I can't imagine a better way to encapsulate this collection. Uncharted: Drake's Fortune was a fine game in 2007, but its wrinkles are deeper now, its age more apparent.

With Uncharted 2 and 3, though, Naughty Dog transcended Drake's own small beginnings. The Nathan Drake Collection is a firsthand account of Naughty Dog's growth as a storyteller, and this collection is the best way to relive that history, and witness its transformation up close.