Carl’s Jr. hit with $1.45 million in fines for failing to pay LA’s minimum wage
The Carl’s Jr. at 3770 Cahuenga Blvd., in Studio City near Universal Studios Hollywood, is one of seven restaurants accused of violating minimum wage regulations. (Image from Google Street View)
The Carl’s Jr. at 3770 Cahuenga Blvd., in Studio City near Universal Studios Hollywood, is one of seven restaurants accused of violating minimum wage regulations. (Image from Google Street View) 
By Elizabeth Chou, Los Angeles Daily News
POSTED: 06/26/17, 1:30 PM PDT | UPDATED: 6 HRS AGO 1 COMMENT
Office of Wage Standards director John Reamer joins City Attorney Mike Feuer to demand Carl’s Jr. pay $1.45 million penalties and restitution for paying employees at seven Los Angeles area locations under the city minimum wage. (Photo by Elizabeth Chou/Los Angeles Daily News)
Office of Wage Standards director John Reamer joins City Attorney Mike Feuer to demand Carl’s Jr. pay $1.45 million penalties and restitution for paying employees at seven Los Angeles area locations under the city minimum wage. (Photo by Elizabeth Chou/Los Angeles Daily News) 
Los Angeles City Attorney Mike Feuer put the heat on fast-food company Carl’s Jr. Monday, demanding the restaurant chain fork over $1.45 million in penalties and back wages for allegedly failing to pay dozens of workers the city’s $10.50 minimum wage.

Investigators with the city’s Office of Wage Standards looked into a complaint from an employee that later led to the discovery the company was paying 37 workers from seven store locations at a rate below the city’s minimum wage over the course of the past year.

Feuer said the company’s alleged failure to pay minimum wages is a “slap in the face to” workers who are “struggling to make ends meet everyday.”

The city has its own minimum wage, separate from state and federal wages, that is set to climb to $15 by 2021 for large companies like Carl’s Jr. The city’s minimum wage will go up to $12 on July 1, for companies with 26 or more workers.

The city is alleging a failure to pay the city minimum wage at store sites in Studio City, Sun Valley, Boyle Heights, downtown Los Angeles, Westchester, Harbor Gateway and central Los Angeles.

A spokesperson for Carl’s Jr.’s parent company, CKE Restaurants, Inc., said in a statement that they were made aware of an “inadvertent payroll error” in April through an “external audit” done by the city. Since then, “all employees were swiftly made whole,” with the workers paid about $5,400 that they were owed, the spokesperson said.

The company’s spokesperson also said they are “willing to pay a reasonable fine for our mistake,” but they are objecting to the “excessive demands” made by the Office of Wage Standards, the CKE statement said.

John Reamer, who leads the Office of Wage Standards, responded Monday that his investigators did not receive any evidence showing that the company did comply with the city’s wage ordinance.

“There has not been a good-faith effort to resolve this situation,” he said, noting that the company postponed handing over materials five times. Investigators who tried to interview workers at a couple of Carl’s Jr. locations were turned away initially, Feuer said.

Feuer said the fast food company the “purports” to have paid back the wages, and they recently received some records that they have yet to verify.


Reamer also disputed the idea that the $1.45 million amount in penalties is excessive, saying that they are meant to address the hardships the company’s “low-wage” workers went through when they were not paid their full wages.

“For some it may seem like a pittance, but for others it could be a lot,” Reamer said. “This has gone on for as long as it has because for 91 days, we have not reached a conclusion with Carl’s Jr.”

According to a “letter of corrections” the city sent to Carl’s Jr., dated Friday, the employees were owed back wages ranging from $18.36 to $467.73 each. How much under the minimum wage they were paid an hour varied, officials said.

Reamer’s office is seeking a total of $4,574 in back wages, as well as $910,000 in penalties that would go to the 37 workers. The Office of Wage Standards is demanding that Carl’s Jr. also pay an additional $541,423 in penalties and fines directly to the city of Los Angeles, for other violations.

The city also accused the company of failing to put up a poster at two locations giving workers notice about their minimum wage rate, sick leave benefits and other rights.

The company has 30 days to respond to a “letter of correction” the city sent on Friday, and can contest the penalties and fines.