Are 'food comas' real or a figment of your digestion?
(CNN)You've just finished a big meal, and you're stuffed. You're thinking of taking a walk or even a stretch before clearing the table, but the thought of just getting out of your chair seems like a challenge.

The idea of taking a snooze on the couch seems more and more appealing.
Sounds familiar? There's a name for it: It's called postprandial somnolence -- commonly referred to as "food coma." The phenomenon refers to the tired, sleepy feeling that many of us experience after eating a big meal. And the causes are based on different theories, some more plausible than others.
Blood flow shifts
According to David Levitsky, professor of nutrition and psychology at Cornell University, the most likely explanation for food comas has to do with changes in circulation. When food enters your stomach and activates the gastrointestinal tract, "blood flow shifts from the muscles and brain into the stomach and intestines," he explained. "And when blood volume goes down in the brain, we get woozy and tired. It's why I have to make my lectures extremely exciting: They're right after lunch."
These blood shifts occur because eating a meal activates our parasympathetic nervous system, the part of our nervous system that triggers digestion and absorption of food. It's been dubbed the "rest and digest system," as its aim is to conserve energy as it slows heart rate and increases intestinal activity, preparing the body to assimilate a meal's nutrients.
On the flip side, our sympathetic nervous system takes on the opposite role: It's triggered in response to a threat or danger and induces a "fight or flight" response, resulting in increased heart rate and increased blood flow to the brain.
Bigger meals have more effects
You're not at risk of falling into a food coma if you're just having a few bites of a snack, though. "It's got to be a large meal," Levitsky said. "The parasympathetic nervous system is activated when you eat, but (the extent to which it induces sleepiness) depends on the magnitude of the meal."
How does it work? It has to do with gastric distention, or the stretching of the stomach after we eat a large amount of food. The bigger the meal, the more distention and the greater the effects.
"If you have a large meal, the (degree of) gastric distention and hormonal stimulation that occurs will make you sleepier than if you had a bowl of soup," explained Dr. William Orr, a clinical professor of medicine at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center who has published studies on the topic.
Also, a liquid meal seems to make us less tired than a solid meal. "Our study found that in contrast to a liquid meal, a solid meal creates more sleepiness when compared to an equivalent volume of water," Orr said.
Part of the reason is that liquids and solids stimulate different parts of the stomach and have different feedback stimuli to the brain, according to Orr. Liquids are primarily handled in the upper part of the stomach, known as the fundus, whereas solids are primarily processed in the antrum, or the lower part. It's more likely that the antrum has neural connections in the brain that are more likely to induce sleepiness, he said.