Millennial Moms: The $2.4 Trillion Social Media Influencer
There is nothing new under the sun, and what once was old is new again. Indeed, 60 years later the Tupperware business model has resurged into a 'digital' house party for the 21st century mom.

It has been widely reported that mothers control 85% of household purchases and have a U.S. spending power of $2.4 trillion. Within this segment are tens of millions of millennial moms. In fact 83% of new moms are millennials, according to a study conducted by BabyCenter- they give birth to about 9,000 generation Alpha babies each day.

These new moms spend over eight hours online primarily searching or browsing for parenting advice. And less than one third look for this advice from parenting or baby apps; instead they turn to social media, reading product recommendations from other moms. Forty-six percent of millennial moms trust the recommendations of other parents, compared to 39% of generation X moms. These younger moms are happy providing their opinions and recommendations, and are more likely to do so, citing themselves as key advisors among their circle of friends.

74% of millennial moms report they are sought out more often than other friends as advisors on a wide range of topics, and have an average of 24 close friends in which to share product recommendations. Aware of the power millennial mothers have in affecting each other’s thinking, companies often connect with those who have a strong digital influence to promote their services or sell their products. Nick Soukas, Director of Marketing for Unilever brand Dove, explains how their company takes the influencing relationship with mothers one step further:

For the last 60 years, Dove has been committed to listening to real women and engaging them with meaningful conversations that matter . We’ve been fortunate to develop a partnership with parenting influencers that enables the brand to have a pulse on what beauty, confidence, and self-esteem means to real women and moms. Whether it is helping us launch a new product line like Baby Dove or annually listening to trends that matter most at Mom 2.0 or having moms join us to make an impact with the Dove Self-Esteem Project, we are humbled to be part of this powerful community of women who champion our shared mission in supporting issues important to women and girls everywhere.

One young mother leveraging her influential power is Dayna Bolden, a millennial mom and wife who in 2014, became a social media influencer. Her social media following grew organically; Bolden initially wanted to encourage Black women to embrace their natural hair in style. She started sharing a few hair and beauty products and fashions she personally loved. As her audience grew, she did so more consistently, sharing professional videos and high-quality image tutorials with her followers.

Now, her mission is motivating and inspiring women to be their best selves, via sharing her love for all things related to fashion, hair and beauty. Via Bolden’s website and social media accounts she also features her lifestyle as a mother, wife, businesswoman and entrepreneur. Bolden branded herself as an influencer and has made a business of advertising on behalf of companies within a variety of industries, including health and beauty (Revlon: Creme of Nature, E.T. Browne Drug Co., Inc.: Palmer’s, Aveda, EDEN BodyWorks and Christian Dior Makeup), apparel (Saks Fifth Avenue) and tech (Google).

Bolden enjoys using both her website and social media accounts to influence consumers. Her website is her 'own little space in the digital universe' where she can share more images and content about products and services and can be more creative with personal branding. Yet she favors her social media accounts due to their organic and immediate connection to consumers. A fan of microblogging, Bolden appreciates the easy, short nature of updates, allowing her to post information quickly and reach her audience in seconds. 'I like that with my website I can house all of my work, and I can expand upon the content that I share on my social media outlets.'

Bolden loves her social media accounts because she can grow her following at a much faster rate and there are more brand partnership opportunities, but she also admits there is more pressure to engage with her followers via likes and comments. As a result, Bolden is meticulous about creating engaging content via her brand aesthetic: her photo shoots are hours long, she does her own hair and makeup, she styles her own looks and she carefully reviews photos of each pose to ensure consistency. Bolden even takes the extra measure to hire photographers specializing in influencer photography like Eliza Romero. A photographer and style blogger, Romero understands the perspectives of both companies and influencers, Ultimately, both parties want to convey a specific message without sacrificing their brand equity.