Santa Clarita fire at 75 percent containment after burning 870 acres
1/5

A deer surveys the it's charred surroundings in Placerita Canyon Monday morning.  A fast burning brush fire ignited  by a car crash Sunday afternoon that forced the closure of the 14 Freeway in both directions and destroyed a prop house left about 800 acres charred.     (Photo by David Crane, Los Angeles Daily News/SCNG)
A deer surveys the it's charred surroundings in Placerita Canyon Monday morning. A fast burning brush fire ignited by a car crash Sunday afternoon that forced the closure of the 14 Freeway in both directions and destroyed a prop house left about 800 acres charred. (Photo by David Crane, Los Angeles Daily News/SCNG)

undefined

Photos: Firefighters Mop up 800 Acre Placerita Fire
‹›
By Wes Woods, Los Angeles Daily News
POSTED: 06/26/17, 12:44 PM PDT | UPDATED: 2 HRS AGO 0 COMMENTS
Hundreds of firefighters have been battling the Placerita fire, along with four helicopters and two airplanes assisting in the battle.(Photo by Mike Meadows/Special to the Los Angeles Daily News)
Hundreds of firefighters have been battling the Placerita fire, along with four helicopters and two airplanes assisting in the battle.(Photo by Mike Meadows/Special to the Los Angeles Daily News) 
SANTA CLARITA >> Dennis Brazzil smelled smoke before he lost his jacuzzi and the gazebo over it to the fast-moving flames of the Placerita fire.

Brazzil, 67, spent Monday afternoon trying to figure out the value of the lost items as he walked through his charred backyard in the 18900 block of west Tenderfoot Trail Road.

“I could smell the smoke, and I called the fire department, and they told me about the fire on the 14 [Freeway],” the retired Los Angeles Unified School District elementary teacher said. “I could see the flames. I could see the smoke coming over the hill. And I started wetting things down.”

The blaze broke out Sunday afternoon in Santa Clarita at the 14 Freeway. Since then, it’s burned more than 870 acres and was at 75 percent containment by late Monday.

Mark McCloud lives nearby, in the 25200 block of North Running Horse Road. He grabbed a hose to help his mother-in-law battle the blaze.

“The fire came down right behind her house,” said McCloud, 56. “But then luckily a helicopter had dumped a load of water on the back hill, which knocked the fire down to where it was a grouping of many smaller fires at that point. So we got the hoses out and shovel and started climbing on those hills and squirting things.”

McCloud joined Brazzil to put out the fire at the retired teacher’s house. McCloud said they only had about 10 minutes warning from the time they smelled smoke.

“There are times when you can’t evacuate,” McCloud said. “You got to stay there and fight it.”

About 460 firefighters were on scene Monday from various agencies, including the Los Angeles County Fire Department and the U.S. Forest Service, to put out the brush fire.

• RELATED PHOTOS: Placerita fire burns 870 acres, is 50 percent contained, in Santa Clarita area

• RELATED PHOTOS: Firefighters hit Placerita fire hot spots

A crash on the south 14 Freeway near the Sierra Highway off-ramp not far from Placerita Canyon Road, touched off the blaze around 12:47 p.m. Sunday, said Los Angeles County Fire Department Supervising Fire Dispatcher Cheryl Sims.

The crash caused a tree to catch fire, and the flames spread toward Disney Ranch, Deputy Juanita Navarro-Suarez said. One structure was destroyed, she said.

Three firefighters suffered minor injuries, one of them heat-related, according to reports from the scene.

Advertisement

No residents were injured, officials said. But the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department ordered evacuations for Disney Ranch, Tenderfoot Trail Road, Running Horse Road and Placerita Canyon. All evacuation orders were lifted at 10 p.m. Sunday and residents were allowed to return home, the Fire Department said.

The temperature in Santa Clarita hit 107 degrees Sunday, amid strong winds and low humidity. Temperatures were expected to drop to the 90s over the next few days.

That’s welcome news for Brazzil after he lost some of his property to the fire.

He said his home was left untouched by September’s Sand fire, which torched more than 41,400 acres near Sand Canyon Road along the northbound 14 Freeway. This time he wasn’t so lucky.

“With past fires, we’ve been on the perimeter of the fire,” he said. “The Sand fire was down there, and we knew it was headed this way and ... it got fairly close. But it’s just a matter of time before it catches up with you.”