Temperatures start gradual decline, inching toward cooler weekend
People cool off at the Santa Clarita Aquatic Center in Santa Clarita, CA Monday, June 26, 2017.  Temperature soared in two the triple digits Monday in Santa Clarita. (Photo by Hans Gutknecht, Los Angeles Daily News/SCNG)
People cool off at the Santa Clarita Aquatic Center in Santa Clarita, CA Monday, June 26, 2017. Temperature soared in two the triple digits Monday in Santa Clarita. (Photo by Hans Gutknecht, Los Angeles Daily News/SCNG) 
By From staff and wire reports
POSTED: 06/26/17, 8:42 PM PDT | UPDATED: 5 HRS AGO 0 COMMENTS
After a week of record-breaking heat, Southern California should get a bit of a break Tuesday — and cooler days lay ahead this weekend.

Temperatures in Los Angeles — after hovering in the mid-upper 90s all weekend — should dip into the mid-80s today, according to the National Weather Service. And highs will slide a few degrees each day as the weekend approaches.

In Santa Clarita, firefighters Monday got the upper hand on a fast-moving, three-alarm brush fire that scorched at least 870 acres and one structure near the 14 Freeway. Three firefighters were hurt duyring the fire, which ignited amid the triple-digit weekend heat.

Highs Tuesday in the Inland valleys are expected to dip into the 90s. For the rest of the week, temperatures will be in the high 80s to low 90s.

High winds and extreme heat triggered a red flag warning in scattered areas of the Inland Empire on Monday, but it was expected to end at 1 a.m. Tuesday.

The Holcomb fire, which started a week ago, continued to burn in the mountains north of Big Bear Lake. It’s held steady for several days at 1,503 acres and is 91 percent contained. Fire officials said they didn’t expect the uncontrolled areas to grow, but “smoke from interior smoldering may linger in the high desert.”

Small wildfires erupted through the weekend and Monday, as temperatures hovered around 100 around the region and winds kicked up intermittently.

Nearly 200 residents of a Moreno Valley neighborhood were briefly without electricity Monday after a transformer blew up as temperatures soared into the triple digits. Southern California Edison technicians were summoned and were able to get electrical service restored by 2:30 p.m. The temperature at the time was 103 degrees.

In the San Gabriel Valley, temperatures are expected to fall below 90 today, but will stay in the 80s through the weekend.

In the South Bay, Long Beach and orange County costal areas, high temperatures were expected to dance around the low 70s though the weekend.