Military diet: 3-day diet or dud?
(CNN)Looking for an easy diet to lose a quick few pounds? If you're searching on the Internet, chances are you've stumbled on something called the "military diet."

It's also known as the Navy diet, the Army diet and sometimes the ice cream diet, because in addition to hot dogs and tuna fish, you get to eat ice cream on all three days of the program.
Smells fishy, right? Well, hold your nose. It's about to get really stinky.
What is the military diet?
The military diet is a variation of the ever-popular three-day diet, a crash plan of "fill-in-the-blank" foods to eat if you want to lose weight fast. These diets typically claim that you can lose about 10 pounds in three days to a week if you follow their blueprint to the letter. The meal plans are usually extremely basic and calorie-restrictive, because let's face it, that's how you lose weight.
But are these diets healthy? Will the weight stay off?
"With this type of low-calorie, lower-carbohydrate diet, you are losing mostly water and potentially some muscle," said registered dietitian Elaine Magee, author of "Tell Me What to Eat If I Have Diabetes." "Water weight drops quickly as the body's glycogen stores decline, which happens when you restrict carbs and calories. Weight will come back when you begin to eat normally again."
Could it be that the military diet is different? Here's a breakdown of what's prescribed on days one to three of the military diet, with calories calculated via the US Department of Agriculture's calorie-calculating tool, Supertracker.
Breakfast is a cup of caffeinated coffee or tea, one slice of toast with 2 tablespoons of peanut butter and half a grapefruit. That's 308 calories.
Lunch is another cup of coffee or tea, a bare-bones slice of toast (whole-wheat is best, they rightly say) and a half-cup of tuna. This meal is tiny, only 139 calories.
Dinner is 3 ounces of any meat (that's about the size of a playing card), a cup of green beans, half of a banana and a small apple (not a large apple, even though the calorie difference is minuscule), but wait: You get a whole cup of vanilla ice cream! If you choose steak instead of a lean chicken breast as your entree, this meal equals 619 calories.
But even with the steak and the cup of full-fat ice cream, the day adds up to a mere 1,066 calories. No snacks allowed.
"If you're used to eating 2,000 to 2,500 calories a day, such a drastic drop will be hard to do," said registered dietitian Lisa Drayer, who writes about nutrition for CNN. "You're going to be tired and irritable, with difficulty concentrating. It will be hard to exercise, and I would think you'll be quite hungry as well."
Here's day two's repast. It adds up to only 1,193 calories, even if you pick some higher-fat options.
