Queen rocker flies into a rage over BA first class: Guitarist Brian May furious that recliner seats are no longer next to the windows

By Sebastian Shakespeare for the Daily Mail
PUBLISHED: 01:59 BST, 20 June 2017 | UPDATED: 08:37 BST, 20 June 2017

Queen guitarist Brian May is preoccupied with minor changes to the seating plan when he flies first class on British Airways
Amid the seemingly endless bad news of terrorist attacks and disasters, one man apparently has more pressing concerns.
Queen guitarist Brian May is preoccupied with minor changes to the seating plan when he flies first class on British Airways.
The 69-year-old, who is married to former EastEnders star Anita Dobson, is furious that the recliner seats have been reconfigured so they are no longer immediately next to the windows.
‘Travelling on planes has for years been something I have had to do, as part of my job,’ explains May.
‘As I fly today with British Airways, I wonder if I am the only person left in the world who likes to relax in a comfortable seat and dreamily turn my head to the window and get lost in the ever-changing wonders of the planet as they drift by?
‘I wonder this because I’m not aware of anyone except me complaining about the new way the seats are configured in BA First Class.’ May, who memorably performed a guitar solo on the roof of Buckingham Palace at the start of the Queen’s Golden Jubilee concert, wails about the seating changes: ‘I hate it. It costs an arm and a leg to travel this way and I feel that we no longer get our money’s worth.
‘In the old days you sat right next to the window and the view was wide and spectacular.
‘Now they sit you about three feet from the window and so low down all you can see from your seat is a small patch of sky. It’s boring — frustrating.’
He adds on his personal website: ‘If anyone out there agrees please let me (and British Airways) know — OK?’
It is just the latest in a string of frustrations that May has voiced publicly over recent years.
Last year, he attacked ‘b*****d basement builders’, claiming the digging of multi-level ‘iceberg basements’ was turning his West London neighbourhood into a ‘hellhole’.
An outspoken opponent of fox-hunting, he criticised Theresa May for saying during the General Election she would allow a free Commons vote on ending the ban.
 
HM and Duke enjoy a surprise day off 

The Queen appeared to be wearing jodhpurs and headscarf with a light beige jacket and gloves as she rode a horse in Windsor
She was supposed to be in London yesterday for the State Opening of Parliament.
Now that it has been delayed until tomorrow, the Queen took advantage of the fine weather to go for a ride in the grounds of Windsor Castle.
The 91-year-old Monarch was joined by a male companion on the hottest day of the year.
The Queen appeared to be wearing jodhpurs and headscarf with a light beige jacket and gloves.
Meanwhile, her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, could also be seen taking his coach and horses out for a ride through the sprawling estate.
Philip, 96, has been an avid carriage driver since 1971, when he took up the activity — which he described as a ‘geriatric sport’ — after giving up polo, aged 50.
He was instrumental in helping to establish it as a sport in Britain.
He enjoys regular outings with Prince Charles’s old friend Countess Mountbatten, formerly Lady Brabourne.
Prince Philip once said: ‘I thought it would be a nice weekend activity, rather like golfing.’
 
Kate's touching tribute to her Porridge star father 
A heart-warming message from film star Kate Beckinsale, who celebrated Father’s Day with a poignant tribute to her late father, actor Richard Beckinsale.
In the photo she posted on social media, a young Kate lies on the floor while her father lounges on the sofa. 
The Porridge and Rising Damp star died of a heart attack in 1979, when he was 31 and Pearl Harbor beauty Kate was just five.
Kate, now 43, writes: ‘I miss you so much. Happy Father’s Day. Thank you for teaching me love, and funny, and that both last forever.’

Kate Beckinsale posted this photo on social media, a young Kate lies on the floor while her father lounges on the sofa
 
Outspoken cannabis critic Jeremy Clarkson once admitted: ‘If someone lights a joint within 20ft of where I happen to be, my face goes like parchment and I faint.’ 
Now his daughter Emily, who shares his views, reveals she was forced to risk getting involuntarily high in the heatwave. 
‘Our neighbour is smoking a joint outside our window,’ explained the 22-year-old, who lives in Notting Hill. ‘We have to choose between melting or accidentally getting us all (dog included) stoned.’ 
 
Theresa May has held private prayer sessions with the Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, it was reported at the weekend.
But her predecessor was less devout. David Cameron memorably once described his faith in terms of an unreliable radio signal: ‘Like Magic FM in the Chilterns, it comes and goes.’ When Welby was asked if he used to pray with fellow Old Etonian Cameron, he replied: ‘I used to pray for him.’


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-4619964/Queen-s-Brian-flies-rage-BA-class.html#ixzz4kXMQZF00 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
