The One Tool That Lets You Tear It Down and Build It Back Again

Dewalt’s 22 oz. Demo Hammer hits the sweet spot.
The Characteristics

DeWalt, a U.S. manufacturer nearing its centennial, is best known for its standout 20-volt MAX power tools. The inspiration for the 22-oz. Demo hammer came from job-site visits, where product development, engineering, and research teams observed residential construction workers turning to chisels and crowbars to handle slightly bent boards. A regular hammer isn’t as effective when you need to punch through drywall or twist and knock away loose framework. DeWalt’s uber-hammer has the ­built-in capability to wrangle 2x4s, plus a larger strike face to drive nails, a side nail-puller to use in confined spaces, and an enlarged claw to give you better leverage.

The Competition

A common claw hammer will set you back from $10 for a basic fiberglass model to $200 for a titanium one from Stiletto Tools. But those looking to do some damage will usually turn to a heavier-duty framing hammer with a straight claw—better for prying and other demolition work. Professional crews use 2-pound hammers such as the Vaughan 707M or the Estwing (both about $30), which have steel handles and milled faces to grip framing nails. Then there’s the $70 Stanley Fubar, a prototype crowbar, wrench, and lumber-grabber. But its 8-pound weight doesn’t function as well as the 22-oz. for pounding nails. Pricing its hammer at $29.99, DeWalt is betting there’s a market somewhere in the middle.

The Case

The 22-oz. Demo hammer gets its menacing heft (and name) from framers’ preferred head weight, which is light enough to limit fatigue during extended use but powerful enough to handle lumber and drive nails. At 2 inches wide, the same width as a wall stud, the ribbed two-tier jaw excels at gripping and wresting framework when tearing through sheetrock. A wide, smooth strike face hits nails efficiently and without leaving a mark. And the supersize claw makes prying off baseboards a breeze. Made from carbon steel that’s been hot-forged and heat-treated, this well-tested tool is extremely strong and durable. 