Dubai theme parks: A traveler's guide to what's new and wild
(CNN) — In Dubai, a city where more is always more and bigger is most certainly better, two brand new theme parks are vying for the hearts of visitors.
Both feature cinematic collaborations. Both come with thrilling roller-coasters and kid-friendly rides. And both have only just opened their doors.
So which one is best?
IMG Worlds of Adventure
Having only just opened at the end of August, this 1.5 million square feet (think 28 soccer fields) theme park is pretty much paradise for film fans.
Marvel plays a big collaborating role here, as does Cartoon Network, owned by CNN's parent company.
The result is that visitors can battle evil with The Avengers, stop Doctor Octopus with Spider-Man, mingle with dinosaurs in The Lost Valley, then dine at Iron Man's swanky 10-story sky deck restaurant.
Smaller ones can enjoy a Powerpuff Girls ride before catching a character-themed live show.
Marvel and Cartoon Network not your thing?
There's IMG Boulevard, an avenue filled with shops and restaurants, as well as the ghoulish maze of The Haunted Hotel.
And when it all gets too tiring, there's a 12-screen cinema with IMAX and VIP offerings to help you kick back.
In total, the massive venue has 28 places to eat and drink, 25 retail outlets and hundreds of rides.
As for the number of visitors competing for spots in line?
If Lennard Otto, CEO of IMG Worlds of Adventure has his way, there will be many.
"We expect to host over 4.5 million people in our first year of operation," he says.
Given that this new launch is the world's largest indoor theme park, there's sure to be plenty of space.
Tickets cost $82 for adult and $68 for children. Currently booking online provides a 10% discount.
Dubai Parks & Resorts
For some theme park goers, it doesn't get better than spending days bouncing across four different theme parks, all while staying in a themed hotel.
Dubai Parks & Resorts is for them.
This expansive space contains four interconnecting theme parks: Legoland Dubai, Legoland Water Park, Bollywood Parks and the Hollywood-themed Motiongate.
In theory, it's possible to buy a pass to all four and meander between.
But currently only Legoland Dubai has opened; the other three parks have all been delayed.
Bollywood Parks and the hotel opened mid-November. Legoland Waterpark and Cinema-friendly Motiongate are to swing open their doors in December.
When everything's done, there'll be more than 100 roller-coasters and rides, themed restaurants ranging from street food to fine dining, live entertainment, shops and multiple-day razzle-dazzle.
All the parks are connected by a walkway that's filled with stores and restaurants.
Super-keen park-goers can stay at Lapita Hotel Dubai, a Polynesian-themed Autograph Collection resort located in the middle of all the action (doubles from $354 per night).
As for tickets, prices vary by park and type. A four-day pass for all parks will set you back $242 for adults and $215 for children.
A one-day VIP ticket, which comes with queue-skipping and a personal tour guide, is $408.
See below for a detailed park and price breakdown.