Disneyland’s horses relax, get trained at new Circle D Ranch in Norco


By Mark Eades, The Orange County Register
POSTED: 06/26/17, 12:11 PM PDT | UPDATED: 14 HRS AGO 1 COMMENT
Ducky, one of 18 horses currently owned by the Disneyland Resort, takes a look out of its stall in the barn at the Disney-owned Circle D Ranch in Norco.
Ducky, one of 18 horses currently owned by the Disneyland Resort, takes a look out of its stall in the barn at the Disney-owned Circle D Ranch in Norco. Photo by Mark Eades, Orange County Register/SCNG
 NORCO >> When the equines on the front of the Horse-Drawn Streetcars finish their three to four days a week working at Disneyland, they get to go home to their new digs in Norco.

“It’s big and comfortable here. The horses love it,” said Jennifer Gable, stage manager at the ranch.

The Circle D Ranch, as it is called, was in the northwest section of Disneyland’s backstage (what Disneyland calls areas its visitors cannot see), behind the berm that hid it from view. But plans called for using that space as part of the new 14-acre “Star Wars” land now under construction.

After a two-year search, a 5 1/4 acre property was found in Norco suitable for Disney’s and the horses’ needs. The property was purchased from a trust owned by the DeRuyter family. It was a chicken egg ranch and a Christmas Tree farm in its history. It included the house, which has been converted into offices for the ranch hands.

The new ranch, that opened in June 2017, is bigger than the old one by nearly 2 acres, giving the horses and trainers plenty of room.

“Each horse gets its own private stall in our new barn, including their own private outdoor section,” Gable said.

The barn has 20 stalls, room for more horses, as Disneyland owns 18 horses. Besides the stalls, there is a harness room – where each horse’s harness hangs when not in use at the ranch or at Disneyland on the Streetcars.

“The harnesses are individually fitted to each horse,” Gable said.

The harness room also holds harnesses used for weddings, or for pulling other wagons at special events like parades in Norco. One of those wagons is the original, now restored, Stagecoach used in the original attraction of the same name at the park in the 1950s.

While at the ranch, and at Disneyland, their diet is carefully controlled. They get two different types of hay and a variety of grains. They are fed through a device that makes the horses eat as if they’re in the field, and cannot just gorge themselves.

Veterinarians monitor their diet, and check the horses regularly, including their weight that can reach nearly 2,000 pounds for some. The horses also get regular baths, and their stalls are cleaned on a daily basis. “Some of the horses are really neat and do their duty in one corner. Others are pretty messy,” said Gable.


There are two large corrals (turnouts) where the horses get to spend 2-3 hours a day just hanging out with other horses – weather permitting.

“We don’t do any training with them while they’re in there, it’s just a chance for them to just be a horse,” said Gable.

But the horses also undergo training at the ranch; for the more experienced horses, it’s a refresher course. For the younger horses, this is where their training begins.

That training starts with pulling a cart, and getting them accustomed to the noises at Disneyland. Leigha Beck, a trainer at the ranch, said they use a variety of things including drums and tambourines to make all kinds of noise.

“We even do a lot of clapping and jumping around the horse, just like what might happen at Disneyland,” Beck said.

The horses have a regular schedule posted in the stables, listing their training and their shifts at Disneyland.

When it’s a horse’s turn to work at the park, it is loaded into a special trailer and transported to the park – about a 45-minute drive. While at Disneyland, they stay in a barn behind New Orleans Square, when not working their three-hour shift on Main Street U.S.A. The ones that have been working at the park are then put in the trailers and returned to the ranch.

There are five different types of large horses stabled at the ranch and used at Disneyland including Percherons, Belgians, Brabants, Shires and Clydesdales.