HBOS fraud victims go unpaid as Lloyds battles Noel Edmonds
Bank denies star’s claim £100m scheme is a ‘sham’ as only one victim of loans scam has received compensation
Five months after a high court judge handed out lengthy jail terms to a group of financiers who left business owners “cheated, defeated and penniless”, only one of the victims of the HBOS fraud has received compensation.

Lloyds Banking Group – which rescued HBOS in 2008 after the fraud took place – has set aside £100m for redress but now has little chance of meeting a month-end deadline it had set to make offers to all 64 victims.

Instead the bank is mired in a public battle with TV celebrity Noel Edmonds – one of the victims – who accuses Lloyds of creating a “sham” compensation process which lacks transparency. Edmonds is also calling on Professor Russel Griggs, the Scottish businessman appointed as independent reviewer of the compensation process, to quit.

There are concerns that the £100m compensation pot will not be enough – Edmonds alone is seeking £73m – amid signs that Lloyds is facing an uphill battle in resolving all the issues surrounding the fraud that took place over a decade ago at HBOS’s Reading office.

The City regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority, is investigating the “extent and nature of the knowledge of these matters within HBOS”. Lloyds has also appointed a retired high court judge to look at whether it investigated the problems in Reading promptly at the time of the takeover and whether it then reported its findings to the authorities.

Anthony Stansfeld, police and crime commissioner of Thames Valley police, which led the prosecution, believes the £100m set aside by Lloyds is “nothing like the sum that will be required” to compensate the small businesses which had contact with the corrupt financiers. He said he has seen an email showing HBOS knew about the fraud in 2008 when it was estimated £200m had been defrauded.

Even before the £100m compensation provision, Lloyds had lost £250m on loans caught up in the fraud which took place period between 2003 and 2007 when HBOS employee Lynden Scourfield, who was in charge of looking after troubled businesses, referred struggling companies to David Mills and his consultancy QCS in return for luxury cruises and lavish gifts. Mills and his associates, meanwhile, loaded big fees on the businesses and sometimes took control of them. Scourfield had pleaded guilty while the jury convicted Mills and his wife Alison, along with their associates Michael Bancroft and Tony Cartwright. Mark Dobson, a former HBOS banker, was also convicted.
Edmonds has set up a countdown clock, a radio station and created a spoof TV ad online as part of his campaign for compensation. The TV entertainer was not a client of HBOS Reading nor did he become a client of the troubled business division. He is included in the review through his connections with Dobson. Edmonds claims that Dobson effectively became a shadow director of one his businesses, Unique, which was loaned money by HBOS. The former Noel’s House Party host claims HBOS prevented him from selling shares in another business, UBC which would have helped repay the loan.

Jonathan Coad, the lawyer at Keystone Law representing Edmonds, sets out three basic characteristics of a decent compensation scheme, which he says are not present in the Lloyds scheme. They are: the payment of professional fees built up by the claimants; ensuring that customer information provided by Lloyds to the independent reviewer is transparent; and using a “cards on the table” approach to negotiations that allows customers to see the information Lloyds holds about them.

Coad is not alone in being concerned. Alison Loveday, chief executive at law firm Berg, which specialises in bank litigation, warns that victims may have to go through the courts. “Even with the compensation scheme in place, customers are still reliant on the assessment of their claim by the bank and its independent reviewer. There is no confidence that this will result in fair and proper compensation being paid to the victims,” she said.

Lloyds insists it is paying legal and accountancy fees and that the review is not a sham because Griggs’ role is “to agree the individual case outcomes, and to ensure that these outcomes are fair”. “He will make his decisions independently,” Lloyds said.

Some £300,000 is thought to have been paid out to help customers with their day-to-day living costs.

Griggs has hired accountancy firms RSM and Mercer & Hole to assist him and insists he is not rubber stamping compensation sums put to him by Lloyds. “We are thoroughly reviewing each individual case,” his spokesperson said.
Prof Griggs has written to all customers asking them to come forward with information. After this information is submitted to Lloyds, Prof Griggs is then available for meetings and phone calls to discuss the entirety of their information directly with the customer,” the spokesperson added.

MPs are keeping a close watch. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Conservative MP who intends to run as chairman of the Treasury select committee, said the bank should have been ready to compensate customers as soon as the case was over. “Further delay is unfair,” he said. Rees-Mogg believes the customers’ losses should be made good “out of common justice and decency”.

John Mann, a Labour MP who sat on the Treasury select committee in the previous parliament, said Lloyds should get on with it. “Compensation is not a give away. It is for loss suffered. It’s rather symptomatic of the problem that this hasn’t been done,” said Mann.

In the view of one business which was a victim of the fraud, the process is unnecessary. Nikki Turner, who with her husband Paul runs music publisher Zenith which was a customer of Scourfield, is refusing to take part in the Griggs review. She said: “There is no need for a review in the majority of cases because the situation is very clear cut ... The worst thing the bank can do is make the victims go through the whole experience again.”

She added that she received a letter in March from the Lloyds chairman Lord Blackwell, telling her he hoped the compensation process would restore trust in the bank. For some of the victims, at least, that goal has yet is to be achieved.