Singapore hawkers innovate to keep street food tradition alive
(CNN) — Douglas Ng, 24, is a rare fresh-faced "hawkerpreneur" at Golden Mile Food Centre, a hawker center in Singapore.
The owner/chef of Fishball Story, Ng arrives to work during the dark hours of the morning to prep for the day.
He kneads fishball dough, prepares sambal-spiked chili paste and fries condiments like lard and shallots.
Ng's fishballs are unique and legitimately old school.
They're prepped exclusively with yellowtail fish and seasonings, without the addition of flour, the way most fishballs are made nowadays.
After one-and-a-half years working this space with many 12-hour days, Ng takes home just about S$1,000 ($712) each month.
When he recently increased fishball prices from S$3 to S$3.50, he was met with a 40% plunge in business.
—Editor's note: Since being interviewed for this story, Ng has temporarily closed his stall. He tells CNN he plans to reopen his business soon in a new location.
Singapore's hawker foods: Vanishing tradition?
Singapore's aging hawker trade is increasingly facing a dire future. Stalls are stymied by a host of issues that are endangering this once-prized commodity.
"Our hawker heritage differentiates us from other countries," says Willin Low, the chef-owner of Wild Rocket, Wild Oats and Relish local restaurants, and the man widely regarded as the godfather of modern Singaporean cuisine.
"It unites Singaporeans from different ethnic backgrounds, but it looks like the heritage is thinning."
One reason is lack of ownership succession.
"The hawker trade is not something that the young generation fancies," says Ng. "It's a tough and unglamorous job.
"It does not pay well and there isn't much work-life balance. Rentals are high, labor is hard to find and the cost of ingredients is increasing."
A growing local resistance to paying what hawkers say is a fair price for street food doesn't help.
"We'd better eat soon kueh now before it's too late," says Low, referring to the local handcrafted dumplings traditionally made with turnip and bamboo shoots.
Making the beloved street snack, he says, is becoming a lost art.
New crop of 'hawkerpreneurs'
There is hope on the streets. Even as hawker culture faces difficulty, a new band of innovative "hawkerpreneurs" has emerged.
If they're rare, their motives at least seem pure.
"Many people wonder why a young man like me came into this industry," says Ng. "I am here to preserve the hawker heritage, to find a way to make money and, most importantly, be happy.
"I believe my perseverance will pay off one day and I will be successful and prove to young people that they can do it too."
Nick Soon started One Kueh At A Time eight months ago, selling teochew kueh (a glutinous rice-based snack with sweet or savory fillings) at Jalan Berseh Food Centre.
His stall sells four types of artisan kueh -- all for S$1 apiece -- including steamed-to-order ku chye kueh (chive kueh) and soon kueh (with turnip but not traditional bamboo shoots).
The 40-something former insurance executive, who makes all of his food entirely by hand, sees his mission as part of a family legacy.
Soon's mother had been taking orders and making kueh from home since 1983.
Now that she's in her 80s and retired, Soon wants to continue her tradition.