This is the perfect watch brand for anyone who doesn’t consider themselves a watch person
The Insider Picks team writes about stuff we think you'll like. Business Insider has affiliate partnerships, so we get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

2Q== 1
MVMT

Watches are a great addition to anyone's wardrobe. Whether you need a sharp, formal piece to pair with your Sunday best, or are looking for a simple timepiece for an addition to your more casual looks, a watch can do a lot to complete whatever outfit you’re going with on a given day.

MVMT is a young company making some of my favorite affordable watches on the market right now. It’s the brand that I wear to work every day, and I believe it to be a great choice for anyone new to the watch scene, as its watches are sleek, simple, and available at a very fair price point.

Seeing as I’ve already spoken my feelings toward the brand numerous times before in this space, I figured it was about time to get a wider perspective from the Insider Picks team.

For the past few weeks, some of my teammates have been trying their very own MVMT watches on for size. Below you can see their thoughts on the watches they tried out. If you’re in the market for a new piece of wristwear and think MVMT might be right for you, too, you can check out all of MVMT's watches  here.

View As: One Page Slides


Breton Fischetti, senior director, commerce
Breton Fischetti, senior director, commerce
MVMT Watches
Despite everyone having a clock on their phones, I like watches; it's nice to be able to tell the time without the slippery slope of all the other things you can do with a phone. Plus, it's much harder to sneakily pull out your phone in a meeting and sometimes you just want to know how much time you have left before lunch. I usually wear a Seiko, but I really liked the look of my MVMT watch.

Aesthetically it's a pleasure to look at, and plays well dressed up or down. I'd highly recommend this as the perfect "first watch" for someone who maybe hasn't worn one yet, like a graduating college student or young professional. It's a great looking watch at a very accessible price point, so if you try it and find watches aren't your thing or you beat it up a little bit, it's not the end of the world. 

You get pretty good bang for your buck, too, since there's a lot of stuff out there that's way more expensive and doesn't look as good.

Chrono Series White/Caramel Leather, $135
Brandt Ranj, commerce reporter, tech
Brandt Ranj, commerce reporter, tech
MVMT Watches
For the longest time, I wasn’t a watch guy. I just didn’t see the point. Then, I got a smartwatch and changed my tune. I like having the time on my wrist; turns out it actually makes a lot od practical sense. But as much as I love my smartwatch, I wanted an analog watch for interviews, meetings, and dates.

The watch world is gigantic, and I put my search on the back burner until I could comb through my options. The search is over: I really like my MVMT watch. It has a minimalist look, which looks classy instead of flashy, and it pairs well with my business casual clothes. If you’re looking for your first analog watch, or one that looks and feels professional, I couldn’t see you being disappointed with a MVMT watch. I’m certainly not.

The 40 Rose Gold/Brown Leather, $120
Kelsey Mulvey, commerce reporter
Kelsey Mulvey, commerce reporter
MVMT Watches
I was never much of a watch person before getting my MVMT watch. Now, I feel naked with out it. I'm pretty particular about watches, which is partially the reason I was never drawn to them in the first place. But this one is everything I want in a watch: It looks professional, and it is simple enough to wear with any outfit. 

My best friend liked my watch so much she bought one for herself, so I know others see what I see! A watch rookie like me probably wouldn't drop thousands on a fancy Swiss-made chronograph, but I could definitely justify spending $115 on a beautiful watch that I'm excited to wear each day.

Signature Series Gold/Black Leather, $115
Spencer Lambert, commerce intern
Spencer Lambert, commerce intern
MVMT Watches
When it comes to watches, I’ve always been a stainless steel-watch person. I like the weight and aesthetic of them and had never really been interested in leather options. So, in the interest of expanding my horizons, I tried something different when checking out MVMT.

The first thing I liked about my watch was the minimalist look. The rose gold case perfectly complemented the brown leather band so that it was understated, but still fashionable. The biggest shock for me was how light it was compared to steel options. Now that I’ve gotten used to leather straps, steel options seem absurdly bulky to me. 

This watch goes with almost anything, too, from a suit and tie to T-shirt and jeans — a feat that not every watch can pull off.

The 40 Rose Gold/Natural Leather, $120
Tyler Lauletta, commerce reporter
Tyler Lauletta, commerce reporter
MVMT
As I mentioned in my earlier write-up, I am fairly new to the watch game, and was slow to take up wearing them as they always felt a bit too upscale an item for my taste. But I immediately loved the look of the MVMT Chrono, and now I can't imagine my wrist without it.

Well, actually, I can — just the other night I took it off and forgot to throw it back on before heading out to the bar; when my phone died, I felt like a fool having to ask someone for the time.

Every guy should have a watch to complement the vibe of whatever look they're going for, and I guarantee that after a week or so you'll love that you can check the time with just a flick of your wrist. And with a simple, classic aesthetic, MVMT watches are a great place to start.

Chrono Series Gun Metal/Sandstone Leather, $135
This article was originally published on 9/7/2016. 

Disclosure: This post is brought to you by Business Insider's Insider Picks team. We aim to highlight products and services you might find interesting, and if you buy them, we get a small share of the revenue from the sale from our commerce partners, including Amazon. Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, is an investor in Business Insider through his personal investment company Bezos Expeditions. We frequently receive products free of charge from manufacturers to test. This does not drive our decision as to whether or not a product is featured or recommended. We operate independently from our advertising sales team. We welcome your feedback. Have something you think we should know about? Email us at insiderpicks@businessinsider.com.

Read the original article on Insider Picks. Copyright 2017. Follow Insider Picks on Twitter.