Father of missing South Pasadena boy planned to kill son amid divorce, sheriff’s detective says
Flanked by Los Angeles County Sheriff Jim McDonnell and District Attorney Jackie Lacey Lt. Joe Mendoza discusses on Monday, June 26, 2017 the arrest of Aramazd Andressian Sr., in connection with the alleged murder of his 5-year-old son, missing since April. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)
Flanked by Los Angeles County Sheriff Jim McDonnell and District Attorney Jackie Lacey Lt. Joe Mendoza discusses on Monday, June 26, 2017 the arrest of Aramazd Andressian Sr., in connection with the alleged murder of his 5-year-old son, missing since April. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG) 
By Chris Yee, jcain@scng.com, @joshpcain on Twitter
POSTED: 06/26/17, 11:52 AM PDT | UPDATED: 11 HRS AGO 0 COMMENTS
Aramazd Andressian Sr. of South Pasadena was arrested in Las Vegas on June 23, 2017 on suspicion of murdering his son, who had been reported missing more than two months before. Los Angeles County Sheriff's detectives said Andressian Sr. was a flight risk, and had made changes to his appearance., including shaving his beard. (Courtesy photo by Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department)
Aramazd Andressian Sr. of South Pasadena was arrested in Las Vegas on June 23, 2017 on suspicion of murdering his son, who had been reported missing more than two months before. Los Angeles County Sheriff's detectives said Andressian Sr. was a flight risk, and had made changes to his appearance., including shaving his beard. (Courtesy photo by Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department)
County prosecutors and sheriff’s investigators said there was evidence indicating the father of the 5-year-old South Pasadena boy who went missing more than two months ago planned to kill his son amid a tumultuous divorce from his wife.

None of the officials in downtown Los Angeles Monday would talk much about the specific evidence they had against the father, Aramazd Andressian Sr. of South Pasadena.

Los Angeles County District Attorney Jackie Lacey filed a murder charge against Andressian Sr. of South Pasadena last week. He was then arrested Friday in Las Vegas by deputies with the sheriff’s Major Crimes Bureau Fugitive Taskforce, with help from the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department and U.S. Marshals.

Lacey said while investigators have not yet found the body of the boy, Aramazd Andressian Jr., she believed there was enough circumstantial evidence to prosecute the father.

“I would not have filed the charge if I was not confident a jury would convict him,” Lacey said.

Sheriff Jim McDonnell said Andressian Sr. remains in custody in Las Vegas on $10 million bail, and expects him to be extradited to Los Angeles later this week. Lacey said she Andressian Sr. will face arraignment at that time.

Sheriff’s Lt. Joe Mendoza said the arrest happened Friday because investigators believed Andressian Sr. was preparing to flee the country. He had been living in Las Vegas for 47 days, Mendoza said, and had made several efforts to change his appearance, including shaving his beard.

“If my son went missing, I’d be doing the same thing (Andressian Jr.’s mother) Ana (Estevez) was doing — handing out fliers, going out to search — not socializing in Vegas,” Mendoza said.

Refusing to share specifics about what evidence they collected in the case, Mendoza said they believe Andressian Sr. killed his son to get back at Estevez during their divorce.

An attorney for Andressian Sr., Daniel Nardoni of Pasadena, did not respond to several calls for comment.

Andressian Jr. was last seen leaving Disneyland with his father around 1 a.m. on April 21. Surveillance video taken six hours later showed Andressian Sr. at Lake Cachuma in Santa Barbara County. His son wasn’t with him.

Mendoza also said Andressian Sr. gave investigators inaccurate information in interviews.

Andressian Jr. was reported missing by his mother on April 22 when Andressian Sr. failed to turn over the child to his mother for a scheduled custody exchange.

The same day the child was reported missing, Andressian Sr. was found unconscious near his car, which was parked at the Arroyo Seco Park in South Pasadena. The vehicle was doused in gasoline and there was a rag sticking out of the gas tank.

He told police he had taken prescription pills that belonged to someone else and did not know what had happened to his son.


In prior weeks, homicide detectives had said that they were confident the missing boy was still alive and being held somewhere. A massive search for the missing boy ensued.

Sheriff’s deputies served a search warrant at the Montebello home of Andressian Sr.’s mother. The deputies were seen taking computer equipment from the home.

Officials and volunteers scoured every place the man and son were known to have visited, including Arroyo Seco Park.

Search teams repeatedly returned to Lake Cachuma. Before their statements Monday, sheriff’s officials had said witnesses reported seeing the boy with his father there.

In a statement shared by the Sheriff’s Department, Estevez thanked investigators and the community for all the concern they’ve shown for her son, who goes by the nickname “Piqui.” She expressed great sorrow at the conclusion that her son is almost certainly dead.

“My heart is shattered and I will miss my son immensely each and every second of every day for the rest of my life,” she said in the statement. “Piqui was everything great in my life and I cannot imagine the emptiness and void that I will bear until we are together again someday.”