How much would you pay to keep cool? From £1 to £100,000, it's the Mail's ultimate guide to glorious gadgets guaranteed to beat the heat
By Femail Reporter
PUBLISHED: 01:25 BST, 20 June 2017 | UPDATED: 07:38 BST, 20 June 2017

£1 PINT-SIZED PADDLING POOL

Mini Paddling Pool, poundland.co.uk
Looking to chill on a very tight budget? Pop your feet into this £1, 55cm-diameter paddling pool. Perfect for younger children or a quick cool-down after a long day at the office, and surprisingly sturdy.
£1 PINT-SIZED PADDLING POOL Mini Paddling Pool, poundland.co.uk

£3.95 A SHIVER AS YOU SHOWER
Lush Whoosh Shower Jelly, uk.lush.com
This wobbly jelly is designed to sit in your freezer until you’re ready to shower, then you scoop out a handful and scrub it all over your body for a burst of icy relief. It contains rosemary and geranium oils, which will soothe sunburnt skin.
£3.95 A SHIVER AS YOU SHOWER Lush Whoosh Shower Jelly, uk.lush.com

£14.95 DEEP-FREEZE DREAMS
Cooling Gel Pad, houseofbath.co.uk
Awake all night because of the heat? Fill this pad with water, pop it on your pillow, and the special cooling gel inside will keep it at a lower temperature than your sticky sheets until dawn — leaving you to drift off comfortably and dream of igloos. 
£14.95 DEEP-FREEZE DREAMS Cooling Gel Pad, houseofbath.co.uk
 
£24.95 GLASS OF ICY WHITE
Cooling Pour Spout, theletteroom.com
Warm white wine is horrid at any time, but especially when the sun is beaming down. The solution is this cooling spout, which you chill in the freezer then insert into the neck of an open wine bottle, like a giant icicle to cool down your drink. The best bit? It has a spout, so you don’t have to take it out to help yourself to a glass. There’s even a rubber stopper to prevent spills.
£24.95 GLASS OF ICY WHITE Cooling Pour Spout, theletteroom.com
 
£27.40 MAKE A MIST
MistyMate Cool Patio 10 Outdoor Misting Kit, amazon.co.uk
Turn your sunbaked patio into a rainforest with this 10ft-long misting kit, which comes with nozzles and mounting brackets to spritz you cool from above. Attach to a hose and enjoy the refreshing spray.
£27.40 MAKE A MIST MistyMate Cool Patio 10 Outdoor Misting Kit, amazon.co.uk
 
£180.86 FREEZE YOUR FACE
Ice Mask Bundle, icemask.com
Refresh and anti-age your face with an Ice Mask, which uses ‘Liquid Ice Technology’ to create a super-cooling effect on skin. This strengthens collagen and stimulates circulation for a rejuvenating boost.
£180.86 FREEZE YOUR FACE Ice Mask Bundle, icemask.com

£197.59 PORTABLE AIR CONDITIONING
Evapolar (including shipping), evapolar.com
A 17cm-square box with a fan, water reservoir and temperature gauge, which humidifies, cools and cleans air. That means a beautifully frosty bedroom, plus less frazzled hair and parched skin. Its makers claim the technology is based on material developed for the Russian military.
£197.59 PORTABLE AIR CONDITIONING Evapolar (including shipping), evapolar.com
 
£516.99 MAKE A SPLASH

Happy Hop 15ft Water Slide Bouncy Castle, rideontoys4u.co.uk
Kids feeling overheated and fractious? Perk them up with this incredible 15ft bouncy castle and water slide and they’ll never forget a Mother’s Day card again. It even has a water cannon — very cooling!
£516.99 MAKE A SPLASH Happy Hop 15ft Water Slide Bouncy Castle, rideontoys4u.co.uk

£29.99 SPRITZ TO STAY FRESH
Aquabot Bottle, thefowndry.com
A drinks bottle with a twist. As well as holding hydrating water, this has three spray settings (shower, stream and mist), which can cover more than 25ft — a bit like a grown-up water pistol. Perfect for spritzing on the run.
£29.99 SPRITZ TO STAY FRESH Aquabot Bottle, thefowndry.com

£37.99 LIGHT UP THE NIGHT
Underwater Light Show and Fountain, poolmarket.co.uk
When dusk falls, don’t retreat into your sweltering living room. Instead, entertain the family with a fountain light show, with effects above and below the water.
£37.99 LIGHT UP THE NIGHT Underwater Light Show and Fountain, poolmarket.co.uk

£776 BREEZY BEDTIME
Bedjet V2 Dual Zone Bundle with biorhythm sleep technology (including shipping), bedjet.com
What could be better than climate control in your very own bed? This Bedjet bundle keeps couples at their chosen temperature on their own sides of the mattress through two fans which blast cool or warm air into the bed via a hose and nozzle.
£776 BREEZY BEDTIME Bedjet V2 Dual Zone Bundle with biorhythm sleep technology (including shipping), bedjet.com
 
£49.99 CAR COOL BAG
Mobicool Plug-In Car Picnic Cool Bag, lakeland.co.uk
An excellent way to ensure a picnic doesn’t get warm and soggy in the boot — just plug this into the 12V socket to keep your lunch cool on long journeys.
£49.99 CAR COOL BAG Mobicool Plug-In Car Picnic Cool Bag, lakeland.co.uk
 
£50 SNOW CAVE SPA
Chill Area spa day, k-west.co.uk
The latest trendy spa treatment? Relaxing in a snowy paradise — they must have seen the heatwave coming. Chilled to minus 15c, this chilly cabin has real icicles dangling from the ceiling. Brrr-illiant!
£50 SNOW CAVE SPA Chill Area spa day, k-west.co.uk
 
£81.49 RUN IN THE SUN
TechNiche Europe AeroChill Fitness Cooling Vest, cooling clothing.shop
Stay fit no matter how high the mercury in one of these evaporative cooling technology vests. To activate, soak in water for one to two minutes, then drain. It’ll keep cool for up to ten hours.
£81.49 RUN IN THE SUN TechNiche Europe AeroChill Fitness Cooling Vest, cooling clothing.shop

£6,995 POP-UP POOL
Zodiac Aztek Maxiwood Round Wooden Pool 4m, amazon.co.uk 
If you have the space, a swimming pool is surelythe ultimate way to cool off as well as keep fit. At 4m wide, this is a great size for many gardens and can be installed above or below ground. Whether you’re partial to a quick dunk or long afternoons splashing around, it’s great fun for all the family.
£6,995 POP-UP POOL Zodiac Aztek Maxiwood Round Wooden Pool 4m, amazon.co.uk

£96,450 CHILL YOU FIZZ IN STYLE
Van Perckens Champagne Bucket, lux-exchange.com 
Clearly your fizz needs to stay cool, so why not invest in a champagne bucket that costs more than a luxury car? The set is made from gold, silver and diamonds and includessix crystal glasses in a rosewood box.
£96,450 CHILL YOU FIZZ IN STYLE Van Perckens Champagne Bucket, lux-exchange.com
 
MOBILE BREEZE
Olixar Pocketbreeze mini fan, £9.99, mobilefun.co.uk
Just insert this tiny fan into your mobile phone charger slot. Perfect for the morning bus to work.
MOBILE BREEZE Olixar Pocketbreeze mini fan, £9.99, mobilefun.co.uk
 
CLEVER COGS
LED Clock Fan with Stand, £13, johnlewis.com
Once the whizzing blades of this fan get going they reveal an illuminated clock face that seems to hover in mid-air.
CLEVER COGS LED Clock Fan with Stand, £13, johnlewis.com

ON THE GO
Tee-Zed Handheld Spray Fan with Bottle Water Mist, £8.49, amazon.co.uk
Two in one! A purring miniature fan which you can fill with water. Push a button to be gently sprayed with a refreshing cool mist.
ON THE GO Tee-Zed Handheld Spray Fan with Bottle Water Mist, £8.49, amazon.co.uk

BACK TO BASICS
Swan retro desk fan, around £50, amazon.co.uk
In chic KitchenAid shades including cream, scarlet and baby blue, these vintage desk fans keep you cool in style.
BACK TO BASICS Swan retro desk fan, around £50, amazon.co.uk

TROPICAL TREAT
Deco Breeze Parrot Figurine Fan, £62, air-n-water.com
This art deco parrot hides a small fan in its wire-feathered chest. If parrots aren’t your type, you can go for a whirring owl, pelican or even a peacock.
TROPICAL TREAT Deco Breeze Parrot Figurine Fan, £62, air-n-water.com

CHILLY CHA-CHING
Dyson Pure Hot+Cool Link, £499, currys.co.uk
pricey but smart, this blade-free fan scrubs allergens from air.
CHILLY CHA-CHING Dyson Pure Hot+Cool Link, £499, currys.co.uk

COOL SENSATION
SimplyGo cooling vest (right), £22, cooling dog mat, £25, Pets at Home
Dogs seek cool surfaces to lie on when they’re hot. Half a centimetre thick and filled with a gel that draws heat away from a dog’s body, you pop the mat in the freezer for a few hours, then let your dog lie on it. The cooling sensation lasts about three hours.
Alternatively, there are vests made of the same materials, which can be dunked in cold water. My cockapoo Honey took a little while to get used to the mat, but the vest perked her up in the heat.
COOL SENSATION SimplyGo cooling vest (right), £22, cooling dog mat, £25, Pets at Hom

MELON-COLLIE
Plastic watermelon slice (left), £8.99, hairofthedoglondon.com, cooling bowl, £5, Pets at Home
Water-filled dog toys such as this plastic watermelon slice can be frozen and given to your pet. Honey loved gnawing on it to cool off her tongue and gums.
Alternatively, the cooling bowl is made from a double layer of plastic, with water between. Pop it in the freezer, then fill with water and it stays cold until the dish has defrosted. Drinking water allows dogs to salivate more, which lets heat evaporate from their tongue.

Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-4619874/How-pay-cool.html#ixzz4kXF9CrHP 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook