The More, the Merrier: Celebrity Exes Who Vacationed Together With Their New Significant Others
by SAMANTHA SCHNURR | Sat, Aug 6, 2016 1:00 AM

These famous former couples have definitely proven you really can be friends with an ex. 

In 2016, we have more examples than ever before of how to stay a family after a breakup or divorce. Consider the "consciously uncoupled" Gwyneth Paltrow and Chris Martin or co-habitating exes Jennifer Garner and Ben Affleck—they may no longer be linked romantically, but they haven't let their new relationship status get in the way of enjoying trips together with their children, whether they're sitting at Thanksgiving dinner in New York City or soaking in the sun on the beaches of Mexico. 

"We're a family. Even though we're not in a romantic relationship, we're a true family and we like to do things to reinforce that we're a family for the children [and] for each other," the Oscar-winning actress told Matt Lauer on Today. 

Within that same camp are a select few former pairs that have taken the concept one step further—by inviting their new significant other on the family getaway. Here's a look at three former star couples who gave the daunting trend a try. Don't fret—rest assured everyone arrived back home in one piece. 

Kimora Lee Simmons virtually wrote the book on staying friends with an ex. Following her eight year marriage to music producer and entrepreneur Russell Simmons, the mogul has largely remained in her life, particularly for their two daughters, Ming Lee and Aoki Lee. 

As she was about to marry Goldman Sachs banker Tim Leissner, the supermodel, her ex-husband, their daughters and the banker all headed to St. Barts to vacation on a yacht in celebration of the winter holidays. 

"Relationships do change throughout the course of your life, and I always think in terms of relationships changing and evolving rather than starting and stopping," she told the U.K.'s Daily Mail in 2013. "Kids never go away from your life, and if you've been married, that person probably never goes away either. You never get rid of anyone and they never really get rid of you!"

"I try to do everything from the viewpoint of what's best for my kids," she continued. "I have three kids and two great dads and it's not always easy, but you have to try to be a little selfless and we manage just fine."

Needless to say, Leissner passed the family's test as the fashionista and her man were confirmed husband and wife by the following February—and Russell even broke the news. "All of us love @OfficialKimora but the fact is she is happily married. . Tim is has been family for a while now," he tweeted in 2014. 

Just as Kimora articulated, exes will always be tied to each other when children are involved. Take Demi Moore and Bruce Willis, who were married for 13 years and share three daughters.

Nearly a decade after they had divorced—Demi was married to current ex-husband Ashton Kutcher and Willis had begun dating English model and actress Emma Heming—the former couple met each other in Paris with their new significant others in 2008. The occasion was a special one—their middle daughter, Scout LaRue Willis, was being introduced to society at the Crillon Debutante Ball. 

The impact of their longtime dedication to civil co-parenting shows through in their grown-up children today. "I never had to split up vacations or split up birthdays," oldest daughter Rumer Willis said on Larry King Now last year. "They always made an effort to do all of the family events still together and made such an effort to still have our family be as one unit, as opposed to two separate things, which I think really made an impact."

While Kate Hudson and Muse frontman Matt Bellamy broke off their engagement in 2014 after dating for four years and welcoming son Bingham, the split hasn't kept either parent out of their 5-year-old son's life. Just this month, the actress and singer vacationed with Bingham on a beach in Spain with Bellamy's new girlfriend, model Elle Evans, along for the trip. 

A close family unit is something both parents continue to strive for as their son grows up. "If Matt and I had a great relationship, we would still be together, but we chose to move on because we had different visions of how we wanted to live our lives," the actress said in Allure in 2015. "That doesn't mean, though, that we can't rebuild something that would be the best thing for the kids."

"We said, 'We need to try to create something for the kids where they feel like they're gaining something rather than losing something,'" she continued. "It's been a seamless transition. Kids just want to see their parents be cool. Everybody's cool; everybody's good."