Ed Sheeran: ÷ review – everybloke charm fails to mask Divide's calculating soul

Hopping from pant-flinging ballad to Gaelic rap, the former sofa surfer has created a suspiciously slick album that aspires to appeal across the board

In January, Ed Sheeran was interviewed by Chris Evans, who asked whether his pair of stylistically disparate comeback singles – Shape of You and Castle on the Hill, which arrived simultaneously after a three-year hiatus – were written to appeal to the Radio 1 and Radio 2 demographics, respectively. “I wrote both of them for myself,” was Sheeran’s first response, before he reconsidered: “It definitely came into the equation. Everyone said [Castle on the Hill] was a Radio 2 single and we need something for Radio 1. So your theory is correct.”

That Sheeran is a star who considers the best way to make a commercial impact with his music is hardly the revelation of the century (and merely marks him as no more and no less calculating than his peers at the very top level of pop stardom). He is, after all, a consummate professional who would happily thank his accountant, marketing strategist, broadband provider and the concept of gravity if given the stage time at an awards show. However, a flagrant sense of scheming behind every lyric, piece of instrumentation, expression of sentiment and change of mood on Sheeran’s third album hangs over these taut, trim new tracks.

His honesty, however, is admirable. Part of the former couch surfer’s appeal when he emerged in 2010 was that he had little in common with the deity-like singers who had been occupying the charts before his arrival. In fact, he had more in common with the puppeteers behind the pop stars, except he is the architect of his own success, rather than that of others.

He stays relatable throughout his third album – New Man is a genuinely witty takedown of every tattooed bro with a Ministry of Sound compilation – but old-fashioned, boyband theatrics take precedence. Dive is a sexy, guitar-led ballad, full of dramatic pauses perfect for pant-flinging opportunities. “Don’t call me baby … unless you mean it,” he growls with the fervour of a 26-year-old man desperate to be sincerely identified as an infant. Perfect, meanwhile, is more traditionally British in its pop band production: the ghostly gospel backing vocals, ostentatious Disney strings and lyrics drenched in supine sentimentality recall Westlife’s Flying Without Wings. It is built for emotive moments in churches – a bride’s grand entrance down the aisle or a coffin’s tragic descent into an incinerator.

One of the benefits of Sheeran’s everybloke background is that he is able to shape-shift from song to song: his origins are so generic that he loses none of his integrity with each new style. Most startling of all his transformations, though, is the Ed Sheeran we find on Galway Girl, a song so ludicrous his label tried to prevent it from appearing on the record. (He told the Guardian how he convinced the executives: “There’s 400 million people in the world who say they’re Irish, even if they’re not Irish. You meet them in America all the time: ‘I’m a quarter Irish and I’m from Donegal.’ And those type of people are going to fucking love it.”) It’s a Gaelic rap track about a bolshie, brilliant woman who “beat me at darts and beat me at pool” and gets hammered at a lock-in after “dancing the cèilidh singing to trad tunes”. There is something so preposterous about its fusion of sounds that you suspect it will find an audience among the Irish diaspora, but also among the achingly hip, who will pump it out ironically on their iPhones at festival campsites.

Sheeran’s backpacking stint (he took a break from social media and travelled the world at the end of his Multiply campaign) has clearly made a strong impact, albeit in the sense that it sounds as though he went InterRailing and heard some music he liked in station buffets – the Spanish guitar inflections of Eraser – and met some guys who, like, had some pretty deep things to say when he got to Tarifa: “I think that money is the root is all evil,” has the youthful optimism of a wide-eyed gap-year student volunteering at a turtle sanctuary. “Revolution’s coming,” he assures us, between suggesting that world peace can be achieved with a piano, bass and beat, “but what do I know?”

At a time when major artists are becoming increasingly politcally engaged, Sheeran’s vision of hope in the face of modern horrors seems a little fey at best, and tactical at worst. Where others challenge and confront, Sheeran unites.

But if ever there were an artist to make a critic feel redundant, it’s Ed Sheeran. Such is his confidence in Lady in Red-styled love songs or fiddle-based rap tracks that no criticism is strong enough to prevent the imminent and stratospheric sales this record will surely accrue. This is a slick, potent album – one that reeks of nostalgia and comfort, campfires, scented candles, spilt pints of Guinness and, for those not enthralled by his algorithmic songcraft, the sharp stench of a salesman’s cheap cologne.
