Woman, 28, is 'raped nine times by three asylum seekers who filmed the brutal attack on her mobile phone after ambushing her at a town fair in Germany'

Hungarian woman said Ethiopian men attacked her at station near fair in 2016
She claims she was hit before her phone was stolen so she couldn't call for help
Men then raped her three times each, she alleged, and filmed part of the attack
One suspect says he had consensual sex with her, the others deny involvement
By Allan Hall and Chris Pleasance for MailOnline
PUBLISHED: 11:01 BST, 20 June 2017 | UPDATED: 11:06 BST, 20 June 2017

A tearful woman broke down in court in Germany as she alleged that three asylum seekers raped her a total of nine times when she was ambushed at a town fair.
The alleged attack in August 2016 left the 28-year-old Hungarian victim 'shattered,' she told a court in Mühlhausen. 
He mobile phone was stolen and the men used it to film their brutal assault which included kicking and punching her and dragging her by her hair, she claims.
Victim Laura G. claims she was lured to Mühlhausen station, close to a town fair, by three Ethiopian migrants in 2016 before they raped her a total of nine times
The woman said she was forced to have unprotected oral, vaginal and anal sex with three Ethiopian men who she identified in court, The Local reports. 
She claimed the men took it in turns to rape her, sometimes acting as a group, and sometimes individually.
The State Court in Mühlhausen heard how one of the three accused, Isaak N. ,23, approached victim Laura G. as she made her way home from the fair.
She told the court that he grabbed her by the arm and said; 'We are going to have sex now.'
When she tried to run he grabbed her, slapped her to the ground and proceeded to pull her trousers down.
She managed to get to her feet and run - only into the arms of accomplices Medhanie A., 29, and David T., 22. 
'The victim was then dragged under a viaduct, her mouth kept shut in order to silence her cries,' said the prosecution.
The woman (file image) says the men took her phone to stop her calling for help, then filmed as they took it in turns to attack her, sometimes individually and sometimes as a group
The men were arrested the next day. DNA from two of them matched up with DNA collected by police.
'Every one of them raped me three times,' she sobbed in court on Monday. 
Her testimony was cut short due to her emotional state and will be continued on another day.
Earlier in the trial Isaak N. had admitted having sex with the woman, but said the encounter had been consensual.
'I was very drunk at the carnival and I slept with her once,' he said. Two other men had been there at the time, but not Medhanie A. and David T., he claimed.
Medhanie A. and David T. deny any involvement in the crime, saying they were at home at the time, having gone to bed early.
The case continues.


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4620972/Hungarian-woman-28-raped-asylum-seekers-Germany.html#ixzz4kXQqcvXE 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
