This Comic Artist Believes 'This Is The Moment' For Black Arts Community
Last month, The Hutchins Center at Harvard University unveiled their provocative art and design show entitled Elektrik Revival: Remixing The Black Speculative South. Sponsored by The Hiphop Archive and Research Institute, a Harvard-based institute dedicated to the vision of hiphop, Elektrik Revival is an immersive collection of contemporary works set in the black South using mediums such as character sketches and graphic novels. This show aims ambitiously, and decisively, to display the vastness of the black imagination while still addressing strong social themes. Ohio based visual artist Bryan Moss was elated to be a part of the exhibition.

Moss was selected by curator John Jennings to have his illustrations--which vividly depict a fearless foray into afro-futurism—prominently displayed in the exhibit. And as inventive and gorgeous as Moss’ art is, he credits his participation to the power of the tribe. "I met John a couple of years ago at Sol-Con, a comic book convention aimed specifically at minorities,” says Moss. “Then we connected through social media and he shared an idea he had for comics about afro-futurism...a new aesthetic with a sci-fi spin on it for people of color which was right up my alley. It happened so naturally because there is a network of black artists actively making work who strongly support each other."

The 35-year-old knew from a young age that he was destined to be an artist. "People who wouldn't typically pay attention to me when I was a kid...upper middle class people or people who were affluent were like 'oh you make art?' and would talk to me about it,” Moss continues. “It was a good platform to have a conversation even when I was just drawing a picture. I recognized very quickly that it would be my way out of poverty."

Moss grew up on the South Side of Columbus with his parents and five siblings. Before teaching drawing and painting at the Columbus Museum of Art, he owned a T-shirt design business to rake in some extra cash after taking in his youngest sister, Kari, when he was in his mid-20s. His upbringing played an important role in terms of how he would later navigate his career. "I'm bi-racial--my father is black and my mother is white. I identify as a black male and being a part of two very different worlds, I learned how the art game is played and it's not just exclusive to just Columbus," Moss clarifies.

"There is a general understanding that the people who wrote the history of western art are all white males. Now there's this moment where we--meaning people of color--want representation in these spaces. The most effective way to gain access to them is through educational channels because many museums and galleries want to train the public and don't want to be perceived a certain way. They were more receptive to that angle than me just going into a museum saying 'show my art' because it just doesn't work that way. There's a system in place and learning how to use it was my main goal." Moss now works full time as an artist and divides his time at Columbus Museum of Art, teaching private lessons, and mentoring young people.

Over the last few years, he has had his work highlighted with Art Makes Cbus, a campaign started by the Columbus Arts Council to showcase artists in the city who help sustain its culture. He says it's one of his proudest professional moments and laughs while recalling having his image plastered on billboards, newspaper advertisements, and even on television.

Moss insists that that particular movement made him a more focused artist who plans on using his platform to help other creatives that continue to remain underrepresented. "That campaign has really brought a lot of attention to Columbus' art scene and it essentially became the glue that held us together. It gave me the motivation to work harder and to create that new identity, that new brand, that new representation of what a Columbus artist is." He thinks for a moment, sinking deeper into what he really means. "As a person of color, it's really critical to have diversity visually represented in the city because coming from the traditional art perspective and the way we have been marginalized--there's no way that should have happened."