Her social media career's taking off! Toddler, 2, whose 'boyfriend' rant went viral, delights fans with NEW tirade about airport security

Mila Stauffer, from Arizona, became an unlikely web sensation earlier this year 
Her family's YouTube page features a new diatribe about the perils of air travel 
It has amassed more than 72,000 views thanks to her sassy reaction to security  
By James Draper For Mailonline
PUBLISHED: 13:35 BST, 21 June 2017 | UPDATED: 13:50 BST, 21 June 2017

She became an internet sensation when one of her diva meltdowns went viral, earlier this year.
And now two-year-old Mila Stauffer, from Arizona, has the internet fussing over her again thanks to a new tirade..
Specifically, the youngster has vented her spleen at airport security, which she feels is a frustrating impediment to the friendly skies.
Not happy! The youngster is fast-developing a diva reputation thanks to her online strops
Shared on YouTube by mother Katie Stauffer, the clip shows the youngster travelling to Michigan with her family.
'First of all, the line is so long. Ridiculous' she barks. 'I’m two, not cool! Luckily, I’m still on diapers. This could’ve been bad.'
She then complained about airport security staff taking her shoes and beaker before a random search. 
'The dude let me out, but not Charles. He got the pat down. So embarrassing,' she said, while rolling her eyes. 
'We can’t go anywhere without causing a scene. It’s mortifying! TSA ... Never again. You’re done. I’m done with you. I’m not cut out for this.'
In recent days the clip has gone viral, with more than 72,000 views since it was first published.
Popular: A new video she stars in has had more than 72,000 views since it was first published
She means business! The toddler looks visibly irked by having to go through airport checks
Not that this is the first time she's caused a social media stir, of course. 
Earlier this year she found notoriety after she blasted her 'boyfriend' for playing with another child in the park.
Mila angrily told the camera that she has seen Sawyer 'in the park with another girl'. She adds that she is 'so mad' and she is going to 'call him right now'. 
High-maintenance: At one point the precocious girl shielded her face for dramatic effect
'But I'm only two': Mila convincingly explains that her age makes her unlikely to be a threat
The video, filmed in Arizona, shows the high maintenance youngster pick up her pink plastic phone to make a 'call' and give her boyfriend the tongue lashing he deserves.
'I saw you', she fumes before telling Sawyer in no uncertain terms that he must 'never ever' be seen in the park with another girl again.
She ends her rant by menacingly saying: 'Never ever mess with Mila.'
I'm certain that the parents will be up to a pile of teenage "woe is me" as this little self inflicted entitled Diva grows just a bit more. I'd love to be the "spider on the wall" when it really plays their future selves out.

Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/travel/travel_news/article-4624714/Toddler-rants-airport-security-hilarious-video.html#ixzz4khVLMioF 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
