The Insider Picks team writes about stuff we think you'll like. Business Insider has affiliate partnerships, so we get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

FS_Spectral Shutterstock
Spectral/ShutterStock

There are more benefits to regularly working out than burning calories and strengthening your muscles.

But while stress relief and good health are powerful motivators, it can be hard to find the time and energy to go to the gym.

Once you get there, you have to remember to stay hydrated, hope you packed the right tools, and make sure not to hurt yourself.

I asked the Insider Picks team to share the products they use to make their time exercising easier. Whether you use them before, during, or after your workout, these picks could make your time working out an easier and more enjoyable experience, too.

Although the items on this list cover the problems we've faced, we encourage you to send us an email if we missed your biggest fitness gripe.
Bluetooth headphones
I'll admit it; I was a Bluetooth headphones skeptic before receiving a pair of my own. Who has time — let alone remembers — to charge their headphones? But it's been almost a year since I tested TaoTronics' sports headphones and it's still one of the best tech upgrades I've ever made.

The one place these headphones have proved the most useful is the gym. Before going wireless, my phone would regularly fly off the treadmill or stationary bike if I made any sudden movements, taking my headphones with it. Now, my phone stays put, my headphones stay in my ears, and I'm a lot happier for that.

— Kelsey Mulvey, commerce reporter
A reusable bag for sweaty gym clothes
After leaving the gym, I separate my dirty workout clothes and shoes from everything else I'm carrying using the plastic bags provided by the gym. After the second day of doing this, though, I realized I'd be wasting an irresponsible amount of plastic unless I was going to remember to bring the originals with me every time I went.

Instead, I wanted to apply the same idea as bringing reusable bags to the grocery store. BAGGU's reusable bag is a good fix for this, though not perfect; I tie the handles together before stuffing it back into my backpack. 

— Mara Leighton, commerce reporter
A bottle for protein shakes
I like drinking a post-workout protein shake before I leave the gym. I used to keep my big protein jar in my bag, but now that I head straight into the office after working out, I hate carrying that heavy tub with me.

Pouring the protein into my shaker bottle before going to the gym creates a different problem: The powder sticks to the bottom, making it more difficult to mix and creating a bad smell after a couple uses. 

ProTak's BlenderBottle has a "Twist n' Lock" storage system that holds the protein powder in its own compartment. This lets me pour it in after my workout is done, keeping the bottle clean and my bag lighter and less stuffed.

I even use my bottle to drink water during the workout and use it for protein afterwards.            

— Spencer Lambert, UK commerce intern
A special balm for sore muscles
I think of sore muscles after an intense workout class as small trophies. If I wake up the next day ache-free, it's an indication I didn't perform each move correctly or didn't give the class my all. However, sore abs, arms, and legs make it difficult to do the simplest tasks, like walking up a flight of stairs, picking up my bag, and even laughing.

For that reason, I keep a container of muscle balm on my nightstand so I can soothe my aches and pains the moment I wake up without having to army crawl to my bathroom. I'm currently in the market for a new balm, and with many positive reviews, I'm looking to give doTERRA's formula a try.

— Kelsey Mulvey, commerce reporter
Shower flip flops
I kept forgetting to bring flip flops to the gym and wouldn't want to shower somewhere public without them. Showaflop's option eliminates most of my concerns, and since I wouldn't wear them casually, I just keep them in my designated gym bag so I'm never stuck between a rock and a hard place again.

— Mara Leighton, commerce reporter
A running app
As someone who's trying to make the best use of their time, one of the things that keeps me from exercising more is figuring out what to do and where to start. That's why the app "Couch to 5K" has worked for me. It's a nine week running program designed for non-runners to get 5K ready in a few months.

The exercises are guided by a digital instructor who tells you when it's time to run, walk, or briskly walk. The runs start easily enough, but ramp up over time. If you find them too challenging you can go back and do the last week again with no penalty; you set your own pace. This app won't make you fit on its own, but it can give you a beginning point.

— Brant Ranj, associate commerce editor
Quality pairs of gym socks
Regardless of how comfortable your socks are, your feet will hurt if you go for a long run or walk around all day. That said, I have tried several types of athletic socks and am consistently amazed by Bombas'.

Bombas makes its socks from a special cotton that naturally wicks away moisture, stays cool in the summer, and stays warm in the winter. There's extra cushioning on the footbeds, which is comfortable but won't weigh your feet down. Every time I slip then on, I can immediately feel the honeycomb stitching around the middle of each sock give my arches the support they need for a long run or spin class. Best of all? Each pair has special padding along the heel and ankle that keep my feet blister-free.

— Kelsey Mulvey, commerce reporter
Travel containers for toiletries
If you're heading out to work or happy hour after a workout, you probably want to use the hygiene products you buy specifically because you like them, rather than whatever is at the gym.

Grabbing some travel containers makes it easy to transport the shampoo, conditioner, and makeup that you like without lugging the whole heavy bottle to the gym and back.
If you want to see more from Insider Picks, we're collecting emails for an upcoming newsletter. You'll be the first to hear about the stuff we cover. Click here to sign up .

Disclosure: This post is brought to you by Business Insider's Insider Picks team. We aim to highlight products and services you might find interesting, and if you buy them, we get a small share of the revenue from the sale from our commerce partners. We frequently receive products free of charge from manufacturers to test. This does not drive our decision as to whether or not a product is featured or recommended. We operate independently from our advertising sales team. We welcome your feedback. Have something you think we should know about? Email us at insiderpicks@businessinsider.com.

Read the original article on Insider Picks. Copyright 2017. Follow Insider Picks on Twitter.
