How To Save For A Down Payment On A First Home -- Without Giving Up Avocado Toast
Are you renting now and want to buy your own home but aren’t sure how you’ll ever save enough money for the down payment? Recently, Australian property manager Tim Gurner dissed twenty- and thirty-somethings everywhere by saying they’ll never buy a home because they are too preoccupied with spending money on avocado toast. Although I’m well past the early career stage, I found his comments to be condescending and missing the point, especially given the rapidly expanding level of student loan debt and the prohibitive cost of housing in many urban areas.
I also think he’s wrong. You can have your avocado toast and eat it too. Here’s why:
When you’re ready to buy a home, you’ll make it a priority.
Are you ready to buy a home now? There are three facets to being ready:
1. Are you prepared to commit to a geographic location? Many people in their late twenties and early thirties just are not ready to stay in one place yet. My 28-year-old stepdaughter is in the early career stage. She just finished her master’s degree and is starting a new job in a new city. How could she possibly know if she wants to stay there yet?
2. Do you have a spouse, partner and/or kids? Home purchases are strongly related to household formation. A “household” is a group of people living together, and the more new households form, the better it is for the economy overall. Early career adults become financially independent and boost the economy by buying cars, work clothes, travel, and eventually homes of their own.
If you’re single and not a parent, you may not feel as strong of a need to invest in a home purchase. I stayed single until age 39 and it wasn’t until my mid-thirties that I started to rearrange my personal finances to prepare for a home purchase. In fact, according to a Pew Research Center analysis, nearly a third of young adults are living in their parents’ home—a rate higher than in my generation. Economic research from the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco suggests that young adult residential choices (e.g., living with parents) may “delay the timing of the decision to set up households.” In other words, when you’re ready to settle down with a partner or raise kids, you’ll prioritize a home purchase.
3. Can you afford it? As I wrote in a recent blog post, it’s a good idea to keep total housing costs (e.g., mortgage, taxes, insurance, utilities, maintenance) to 25 to 35% of your after-tax income. For example, if your family take-home pay is $4,500 per month, you should try to keep your monthly housing costs somewhere in the range of $1,125 to $1,575. With a 20% down payment, a 30-year mortgage at 4%, and $200 a month for utilities and maintenance, that’s a mortgage range of approximately $128,000 to $200,000.
I realize the 35% ratio could be a challenge in an insanely expensive city like Los Angeles or New York, where housing costs can eat up to half or more of a family’s income, but it’s a helpful guideline. After all, if you are renting, you may be paying a mortgage already—your landlord’s mortgage.
Are your rent and utilities together 35% or less of your take-home pay? If so, you can probably afford the monthly costs of home ownership, although you may have to adjust your expectations about where you buy. You may not be able to afford your first-choice neighborhood, and that’s okay.
You don’t have to stay there forever. According to data from the National Association of Home Builders, the average buyer stays in their home for 13 years. You don’t want to be in a stressful situation where you spend so much money on housing that you can’t fund other important goals, such as retirement, college, or an emergency fund, or have enough wiggle room in your budget to enjoy life now.
Buying real estate is like getting married.
Gurner is correct that splurging on overpriced food items isn’t going to help you save the most effectively for a down payment on a home. The important point he is missing is that when you’re in the stage of life where you are prioritizing brunch with friends or travel over real estate purchases, you’re just not emotionally or geographically ready to buy a home. Real estate is like marriage. The wrong choice can really mess up your life.
Renting, on the other hand, is like dating. It’s something you should keep doing until you are sure you want to settle down and are ready for a committed relationship. Many people are happy dating – and renting – for a long time before they decide to commit.
Believe me. When the right one comes along, you’ll know it. Then everything will change.
You will use your ingenuity to save for the down payment.
I’m not suggesting you should spend all your money now on craft beer and yoga retreats in Bali. Even when you’re renting, it’s important to pay down credit card and student loan debt, build up cash reserves for emergencies, and sock away at least 10 percent of your income for retirement savings.  What I mean is that when you decide to buy a home (and not just daydream about it), that decision will align your actions towards your goal.
It certainly takes time to save for a home down payment, which is likely to be the largest sum of money you’ll ever have to save in a short period of time. The typical buyer puts down 20 percent of the purchase price in cash as a down payment. Per this Forbes article, a 20% down payment on the median home in Cleveland is a reasonable $25,000. In my part of the country, NY/NJ, it’s about $75,000. (California prices are in the stratosphere, so that can be the topic of another blog post.)
Remember, however, that “median” means “midpoint.” That means that 50% of the housing stock would require down payments less than that. In any case, be realistic – and be patient. For most people, it will take you five to seven years to save that kind of money, depending on how much you are willing to prioritize.
Let’s take the Cleveland home purchase example above. To save $25,000 in five years, at a 1 percent interest rate you’d need to save $407 per month. That’s about $13.50 per day; less than you may spend on lunch out or having drinks with a friend after work. It’s doable.
Where I live, in suburban NJ outside of NYC, it’s a bit more of a challenge since it may take you longer to save $75,000. However, you could save that in seven years by putting away $862 per month. That’s about $29 per day, which would involve some bigger choices, such as moving to a smaller apartment, giving up a car, trimming way back on eating out or getting a part-time job to earn some extra money. Once you’ve made the decision to buy, however, you’ll find those kinds of choices easier to make.
Perhaps you can swing the monthly payments plus property taxes, homeowner’s insurance and maintenance, but you don’t have the full 20 percent down payment saved. There are many good mortgage programs for first-time home buyers. (See a summary in my fellow planner Mark Dennis’ article here.)
The key is to know yourself.
When you are ready to buy a home, you’ll make it a priority. If you haven’t saved much up until that point, you’ll need to spend some years building up your savings account. That process will be good for you, and it will help you change your financial behaviors so that when you do buy a home, you’ll be a better steward of your financial investment.