World's most expensive meat? Find it with a Paris butcher
(CNN) — "Would you prefer the 2000 or 2003 vintage?"
A standard question if you're deciding on wine in a fine restaurant -- but unheard of if it's beef you're ordering. That's because only one butcher in the world, Frenchman Alexandre Polmard, offers (arguably) the ultimate in unique -- and expensive -- meat.
The young farmer, breeder and butcher is the sixth generation to work in the eponymous family business, which was founded in 1846.
The business truly distinguished itself in the 1990s when Polmard's grandfather and father investigated and ultimately introduced a meat treatment called "hibernation."
The way it works is cold air is blown at speeds of 120 kilometers per hour over the meat in a -43 C environment.
This allows meat to be kept for any length of time -- and, according to Polmard, with absolutely no loss of quality.
$3,200 for a steak?
The 2000 vintage cote de boeuf (rib steak) can command €3,000 ($3,200).
The breed of cattle in question, rivaling the most expensive and exclusive global names in beef such as Black Angus and Kobe, is called Blonde Aquitaine.
Polmard and his family raise them outside the small town of Saint Mihiel in the Meuse region of Lorraine, northeastern France.
"My family wouldn't dream of raising animals in sheds where they have no space or room to roam," he says.
"Here they are in the open air, living in forests and on parkland. There are shelters they can choose to visit in case it rains or snows. It's really five-star accommodation!"
Keeping stress levels low
Polmard says he talks to his animals daily, ensuring their lives are as comfortable and stress-free as possible -- even when it becomes time for them to end.
Increases in a cow's stress levels as it enters an abattoir cause a subsequent spike in levels of glycogen and lactic acid -- and that means a loss of tenderness and, ultimately, flavor.
Polmard is therefore investing a million euros in an abattoir at his farm in which only four cows will be killed per week -- and in a unique setting to keep stress levels to an absolute minimum.
The results are tangible.
"All the love and attention we give our animals comes through on the plate when you taste it," he says.
"They really are unique."
Fans of fine food seem to agree and are flocking to the Polmard boucherie in the heart of Paris' St. Germain des Pres quarter.
It looks more like a jewelry shop or vintage wine merchant than a butcher shop, the cuts and charcuterie displayed in wooden drawers with handwritten labels, all in a dark, dramatic interior.
Polmard sells only beef from its farm, most of which has been aged between 28 and 56 days.
But it's the vintage "millesime" beef that's so revolutionary.
"I wanted to recreate the world of wine and shake up traditional butchery, seducing people once again to eat beef by offering them something exceptional," says Polmard.