Heapsort
In computer science, heapsort is a comparison-based sorting algorithm. Heapsort can be thought of as an improved selection sort: like that algorithm, it divides its input into a sorted and an unsorted region, and it iteratively shrinks the unsorted region by extracting the largest element and moving that to the sorted region. The improvement consists of the use of a heap data structure rather than a linear-time search to find the maximum.
Although somewhat slower in practice on most machines than a well-implemented quicksort, it has the advantage of a more favorable worst-case O(n log n) runtime. Heapsort is an in-place algorithm, but it is not a stable sort.
Heapsort was invented by J. W. J. Williams in 1964. This was also the birth of the heap, presented already by Williams as a useful data structure in its own right.In the same year, R. W. Floyd published an improved version that could sort an array in-place, continuing his earlier research into the treesort algorithm.
The heapsort algorithm can be divided into two parts.
In the first step, a heap is built out of the data. The heap is often placed in an array with the layout of a complete binary tree. The complete binary tree maps the binary tree structure into the array indices; each array index represents a node; the index of the node's parent, left child branch, or right child branch are simple expressions. For a zero-based array, the root node is stored at index 0; if i is the index of the current node, then
In the second step, a sorted array is created by repeatedly removing the largest element from the heap (the root of the heap), and inserting it into the array. The heap is updated after each removal to maintain the heap. Once all objects have been removed from the heap, the result is a sorted array.
Heapsort can be performed in place. The array can be split into two parts, the sorted array and the heap. The storage of heaps as arrays is diagrammed here. The heap's invariant is preserved after each extraction, so the only cost is that of extraction.
Algorithm
The heapsort algorithm involves preparing the list by first turning it into a max heap. The algorithm then repeatedly swaps the first value of the list with the last value, decreasing the range of values considered in the heap operation by one, and sifting the new first value into its position in the heap. This repeats until the range of considered values is one value in length.
The steps are:
Call the buildMaxHeap() function on the list. Also referred to as heapify(), this builds a heap from a list in O(n) operations.
Swap the first element of the list with the final element. Decrease the considered range of the list by one.
Call the siftDown() function on the list to sift the new first element to its appropriate index in the heap.
Go to step (2) unless the considered range of the list is one element.
The buildMaxHeap() operation is run once, and is O(n) in performance. The siftDown() function is O(log n), and is called n times. Therefore, the performance of this algorithm is O(n + n log n) = O(n log n).