Meet the $130,000 Love Child Between a Supercar and a Station Wagon

The 2018 Callaway Corvette Aerowagen is the highest-powered wagon money can buy.

Yes, there is such a thing as a Corvette wagon.

Made in Temecula, Calif., the Callaway Corvette Aerowagen combines the best of a lot of worlds in a strikingly unusual frame. The hatchback rear will fit three large golf bags, and a 757-horsepower V8 engine is under the hood. It can hit 60 mph in 2.7 seconds.

It also costs a fraction of the price of the multiple six-figure supercars from Lamborghini, Ferrari, and McLaren with similar power. A base 2016 Z06 Coupe costs just under $110,000, but most Callaway Corvettes cost anywhere between $120,000 and $150,000.

With the flip of a few latches and levers, its carbon-fiber roof shell will lift off to become a T-bar convertible. 

And, not for nothing, the Callaway Aerowagen is the fastest street-legal Corvette made today as well as the most powerful car designed and assembled wholly in the U.S. (Dodge’s 840-hp Challenger Demon was designed in Michigan, true, but it is built in Canada.) With a mpg rating of 27 miles on the highway, it has about twice the fuel efficiency as its main competitors. 

The High-Performance Line

If you’re wondering if Callaway Cars has any relation to Callaway Golf, yes, it does; the same family started both companies.  

“For me, it has always been about cars,” Reeves Callaway said last week in Brooklyn. Reeves founded Callaway Cars in 1977, although he had been making cars for years prior; Reeves' father, Ely Callaway Jr., founded Callaway Golf in 1982. “I had initially tried to be a racing driver and had done that for a while before I ran out of money."

In Corvette circles, Callaway the younger is regarded much as Carroll Shelby is among Ford Mustangs. He started modifying cars in the early 1970s while working for the famous Ferrari and Shelby car racer, Bob Bondurant. At the time, Bondurant’s eponymous driving school was running BMW 320i on the track, but students kept needing more power. So Callaway implemented an innovative turbocharging system on a spare 320i and earned wide acclaim in track and BMW enthusiast circles.

General Motors took note as well and requested his expertise in 1985, so now Callaway supercharges Camaros, Silverado trucks, and even Suburbans. What AMG is to Mercedes-Benz, Callaway is to Corvette.

A True Supercar

Callaway’s vision for the wagon-Corvette hybrid was to channel the coach-built, shooting-brake cars that have dotted automotive history since the early 19th century. The term “shooting brake” is literal, referring to when hunting parties would stop midday to picnic—they needed vehicles with extra space in the rear to hold food and rifles. Think of the long 2+2 Ferrari GTC4Lusso for a modern semi-equivalent.

The version I tested was the first of Callaway’s new line: a SC757 Z06 fit with the Aerowagen option. The hatch is made from carbon fiber coated in UV protectant and comes fitted with rear windows of tempered safety glass and a defogging mechanism. It comes with upper and rear spoilers, a halo bar, and Aerowagen badging throughout the exterior and interior of the car.

Driving the car itself feels as exceptional as it does for any good Corvette—big and precise, long yet willing and coachable. Steering resistance is perfectly calibrated; braking is alert and honest. Driving it will feel more natural than you’ll care to admit, if a Corvette isn’t on your automotive wish list. It doesn’t feel heavy or clunky, as you might expect with a cover on the end. The only perceivable change for this wagon, or the most immediate, at least, is the new long rear cuts the minimal visibility to nil.  

Do you already own a modern Corvette C7, SC627 Stingray, or Grand Sport? You can convert it to Aerowagen form, too (as if they aren’t distinct enough). Callaway will do the modification for you for $15,000.

But for the real experience—all the extra power and performance—buy the whole car.