Mexico City's Mayor Calls For Carlos Slim, Other Mexican Billionaires To Influence NAFTA Talks
What role should Mexico's billionaires play in the upcoming renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the trade pact with Mexico and Canada that the Trump Administration has proposed be renegotiated?
Miguel Angel Mancera, Mexico City's Mayor and a possible 2018 presidential contender, has called for the creation of a 12-member group of Mexico's richest men to try to influence from the sidelines the remake of what Donald Trump has labeled "the worst trade deal” ever. Top on Mancera's list is Carlos Slim Helú, Mexico's richest person.
"Slim told me that he was ready to participate, that he was interested," Mancera told me last week when he visited Washington D.C. "I'm convinced we have to include this type of high level interlocutors and listen to their advice. Slim can call presidents, former presidents, top businessmen and politicians and they all take his call."
Arturo Alías Ayub, Slim's spokesperson and son-in-law, acknowledged Mancera's invitation, but  said via email, "There is no answer for the time being."
Mancera and Slim have a close working relationship resulting from the city-related issues they are both part of - Slim as a longtime city benefactor and Mancera as the mayor of México's political, financial and cultural capital. They are often seen side by side inaugurating cultural or educational events sponsored by Slim's foundations in Mexico City.
In February, Mancera and Slim inaugurated a Salvador Dali exhibit along the Paseo de la Reforma, the main avenue of Mexico City, the second largest city by population in Latin America. The 20 sculptures were lent by Museo Soumaya, Slim's art museum.
Every year for two weeks, Aldea Digital, which is sponsored by Slim's telecom company and foundations, transforms the Zocalo, Mexico City's central plaza, into an Internet and computer technology fair. Mancera said that this year, Slim plans to expand Aldea Digital to Iztapalapa, one of Mexico City's most crime-infested boroughs.
Slim is also member of the Fideicomiso del Centro Histórico de la Ciudad de México, a trust fund for restoring the city's historic downtown area.
"We see each other frequently," Mancera said.
Mancera said he has also reached or plans to reach out to other billionaires including mining tycoon Germán Larrea, mining and retail magnate Alberto Bailleres, tequila maker Juan Beckmann and  José Antonio Fernandez Carbajal, CEO and president of FEMSA, Latin America's biggest independent Coca-Cola bottler and distributor, where his billionaire mother-in-law Eva Gonda Rivera and her daughters hold a large stake.
I asked Fernandez Carbajal about Mancera's idea, but said he hadn't heard about it. "Mr. Mancera does well in issuing a call, but the truth is that I wasn't even aware," Fernandez told me last week during an event at the Woodrow Wilson Center's Mexico Institute.
"We are going to support the NAFTA renegotiation for the sake of Mexico and of all the companies that trade with the U.S. We will continue pushing for good relations and a good understanding between the two neighbors," said Fernandez, who was recently  elected member of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's board of trustees.
Fernandez said that his involvement in the NAFTA negotiations, in any case, will be through the Mexican Business Council (Consejo Mexicano de Negocios), a group made up of Mexico's 50 top CEOs. He will also support the NAFTA activities of the Woodrow Wilson Center and the Monterrey Institute of Technology, an elite college in Northern Mexico. Fernandez is a board member of both institutions.
Fernandez believes it's important to get the message out of how many U.S. states and millions of U.S. jobs depend from NAFTA. "[Let people know] what could be lost if there is a disruption of trade."
With the renegotiation of NAFTA looming, neither the U.S. nor Mexico have yet charted their respective courses. Both countries do agree that whatever they renegotiate, it must be concluded by no later than February 2018 so it does not interfere with Mexico's presidential elections and the U.S. mid-term elections later that year.
"I'm optimistic the U.S. and Mexico will end up with a negotiation that's suitable for both countries," Fernandez said.