Gascony poses a wine challenge to Bordeaux
(CNN) — For centuries, Bordeaux has dominated France's wine scene, producing expensive and highly coveted vintages. But Bordeaux better watch out.
On the scene is a recent challenger, the lesser-known region of Gascony.
Situated in southwest France at the foothills of the Pyrenees Mountains, just east of the French Basque coast and on the Spanish border, Gascony is a classic French destination.
Gascony a hilly stretch of countryside dotted with dense forest, sunflower fields and medieval chateau. And, of course, vineyards.
The remarkable wines these vineyards are now producing have, in recent years, helped Gascony step into the spotlight. There are rich, bold reds that could stand up to any glass of Bordeaux, as well as crisp, floral whites that are refreshing and easy to drink.
"Unlike most Bordeaux wines, which require aging, Gascony's wines are meant to be enjoyed now, while they're young," says Remy Grassa, winemaker and co-owner of Domaine du Tariquet, Gascony's largest producer.
They're a better value, too.
Unorthodox techniques
"Gascon wines also have a fantastic price-to-quality ratio that you don't really see in Bordeaux," Grassa adds.
Tariquet, established in 1972, spearheaded the transformation of the wine business in Gascony from a flailing industry into the pioneering wine region it is today.
Grassa's father, Yves, merged traditional French winemaking methods with unorthodox "new world" techniques.
The result: the arrival of fresh, vibrant wines to southwestern France -- a region historically prized for its aged, "old world" wines. Now, Gascony has about 1,200 wineries and produces more than 100 million bottles per year.
There's a mix of dry, aromatic whites made from native grapes like petit manseng and ugni blanc, and velvety reds made from tannat and cabernet franc.
Added bonus? The price. The average Gascon wine retails for just $10 in the United States -- far more affordable than the average Bordeaux, which costs upward of $75.
"Making cost-effective wine, without sacrificing any quality, is so important for us," says Grassa. "We want our wines to be something you can enjoy every day, and not just reserved for special occasions."
Everyday enjoyment
In Gascony, this "everyday enjoyment" extends far beyond just a daily glass of wine. Pursuit of pleasure is seen as a key part of the Gascon lifestyle.
Here, foie gras isn't a luxury or delicacy, but an everyday staple. It's slathered thickly on hunks of bread, stuffed into prunes, baked into eggs, pan-seared and served alone, or alongside grilled duck breast.
Gascon foie gras is considered the best in the country, homemade by local farmers in small batches and sold directly to consumers from farmhouse kitchens.
In recent years, local restaurants like Le Loft and La Vie en Rose have made efforts to elevate traditional Gascon farmhouse fare for visitors, adding balsamic glaze and grilled peaches to seared foie, and wrapping duck pate-stuffed prunes in bacon.
But even with updated culinary offerings, the food scene in Gascony remains unpretentious, characterized by cozy bistro-style dining and modest chefs more interested in filling bellies than collecting Michelin stars.