Meteora: Greece's spectacular monasteries in the sky
(CNN) — High above the Meteora landscape in Greece's central region, 60 monks and nuns live in fabled monasteries perched on the edge of sandstone peaks.
In centuries past, their place of worship brought them solitude and protection from unwanted trespassers.
Today, the Orthodox monasteries are one of the most popular destinations in all of Greece.
Only a few hours from Athens at the fringe of the Plain of Thessaly, the town of Kalambaka plays host to Meteora's spectacular mountaintop attractions.
Windswept monoliths rise abruptly from the earth, with vertical cliffs forming a dramatic backdrop against the flat fields around them.
The picture-perfect vistas have been the inspiration for countless film and TV backdrops, including the Eyrie kingdom in HBO series "Game of Thrones."
Historical playground
But beyond the monasteries and mountains, Meteora is far from being just a visual delight.
This little-known terrain holds claim to some of Europe's most fascinating history, as well as a heap of exhilarating outdoor activities.
Just 2.5 miles outside of Kalambaka is Theopetra Cave, a stunning archaeological site that holds evidence of continuous human inhabitation for over 130,000 years.
The transition from Neanderthal to Homo sapiens is indicated in the layers of soil, and remarkably one of the world's oldest known man-made structures lies at the cave entrance: a wall believed to be 23,000 years old.
It's a phenomenal attraction that anywhere else in the world would be enough to warrant travel to the area, yet this cave is often overshadowed by the even more impressive and awe-inspiring buildings nearby.
Suspended in the air
During the 14th century, the great monk Athanasios Koinovitis brought a group of devout followers from Mount Athos to Meteora, in search of a group of ascetic hermits that had developed a religious stronghold in the region.
He was mesmerized by the hermits' free-climbing skills that had allowed them to live in the caves and fissures high above the ground, and saw an opportunity to create a convent where his flock could meditate and worship in peace.
Employing the hermits as climbing mentors, the new visitors conquered the surrounding mountains and set about creating their own holy haven.
It was then, from 1356 to 1372, that the first Great Meteoron Monastery was born.
Meteora means "suspended in the air," and the way the religious house clung dangerously to the formidable peak quickly gave its name to the entire district.
Years later when the Turks advanced on northern Greece, more monks escaped persecution by climbing the mountains to safety.
Over time 24 monasteries were built, with the steep pillars providing protection from the warriors below.
A network of ropes, pulleys, baskets and ladders were used to lift worshipers and supplies into the monasteries, and these were raised in times of danger to deny access to anyone who posed a threat.
The method worked, and the Orthodox monks easily survived centuries of war and battles.
Today, six of these monasteries remain, segregated between male monks and female nuns, and visitors are welcomed with typical Greek hospitality.