Opponents to rally in LA against bill to extend late-night drinking hours
Senate Bill 384 would allow California cities to extends their late-night drinking hours to as late as 4 a.m. The measure has elicited sharply divided views. (Photo by Jeff Gritchen / Los Angeles Newspaper Group)
Senate Bill 384 would allow California cities to extends their late-night drinking hours to as late as 4 a.m. The measure has elicited sharply divided views. (Photo by Jeff Gritchen / Los Angeles Newspaper Group) 
By Kevin Smith, San Gabriel Valley Tribune
POSTED: 06/26/17, 7:56 PM PDT | UPDATED: 6 HRS AGO 0 COMMENTS
Opponents of a bill that would allow California bars, nightclubs and restaurants to extend their drinking hours to as late as 4 a.m. plan to gather in downtown Los Angeles on Tuesday to speak out against the measure.

Senate Bill 384, also known as the LOCAL act (Let Our Communities Adjust Late Night), would establish a process involving local government, local law enforcement, the general public and the Department of Alcohol Beverage Control to extend the hours of alcohol sales to between 2 and 4 a.m in specific areas.

Authored by Sen. Scott Wiener, D-San Francisco, the bill would also give businesses the option of offering extended alcohol hours only for specific days of the week or certain holidays. The measure cleared the Senate earlier this month and is headed to the Assembly.

SB 384 DRAWS SHARPLY DIVIDED OPINIONS

The bill is supported by the California Restaurant Association, the California Travel Association and the California Hotel & Lodging Association, among others. But a coalition of well over 100 organizations firmly oppose the bill and plan to make their voices heard Tuesday when they gather on the steps of Los Angeles City Hall.

Bruce Lee Livingston, executive director of Alcohol Justice, an industry watchdog group based in San Rafael, said there are plenty of reasons to shoot down SB 384.

“We would see more drunk drivers, more street violence and more noise in the wee hours of the morning,” he said. “It would increase the number of vehicle crashes, assaults and emergency room visits.”

Richard Zaldivar, chairman of the California Alcohol Policy Alliance, agreed. Zaldivar is also the founder and executive director of The Wall Las Memorias Project, an HIV, mental health and substance-abuse prevention organization based in northwest L.A.

“When we started working with HIV prevention we found that there was a high percentage of people who contract HIV while under the influence of alcohol,” he said. “And when you go into neighborhoods of color you see a lot of liquor stores and bars. This is not about prohibition, but about over-saturation of liquor in communities.”

ALCOHOL SALES HELP FUEL CALIFORNIA’S NIGHTTIME INDUSTRY

Wiener’s office notes that California’s nighttime industry — which includes food service, bars/clubs, restaurants and live music — generates billions of dollars a year in consumer spending and employs well over one million Californians. Alcohol sales account for a big part of that.


“We can and should empower local communities to make responsible decisions about nightlife in our state,” Wiener said in a statement issued in late March. “Nightlife is an important part of the culture and economy of many cities throughout our large and diverse state, and the LOCAL Act recognizes this fact by granting local control to extend hours of alcohol sales. This nuanced approach will help us support nightlife, while also respecting communities that prefer to keep alcohol service hours as they are.”

OTHER CITIES ALREADY HAVE EXTENDED DRINKING HOURS

Other cities — including Chicago, Washington D.C., New York City, Buffalo, Las Vegas, Louisville, Atlanta, Miami Beach and New Orleans — already offer alcohol sales beyond 2 a.m.

Rogelio Amador, a supervisor at Limericks Tavern in Alhambra, is in favor of SB 384. Limericks stays open until 10 p.m. weeknights and 2 a.m on the weekend.

“I have no problem with it, but people do tend to get a little crazier after 2 a.m.,” he said. “I guess that’s my only concern ... but I’m all for it.”

Yan Agaev, who owns the White Horse Lounge in Pasadena, offered a more nuanced view.

“I think it all depends on the clientele you are trying to attract,” he said. “I see this working very well for nightclub operators but I think it would just take time for the culture to catch up with it.

I think it would be great here for special events, like New Year’s Eve. That’s the kind of event where people would want to stay out longer.”

A MATTER OF COMPETITION

Sharokina Shams, a spokeswoman for the California Restaurant Association, said it’s essentially a matter of keeping up with the Joneses.

“From a competitive standpoint we want to attract not just business but tourism,” she said. “It makes sense from that perspective to have the option of later hours. I was surprised by the list of cities around the country that already have that. But California, which prides itself on bringing people here, doesn’t have that option.”