Take advantage of REI's big Fourth of July sale — and more of today's best deals from around the web
The Insider Picks team writes about stuff we think you'll like. Business Insider has affiliate partnerships, so we get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

Since you don't have all day to scour the web for noteworthy sales and discounts, we rounded up the best bargains for you to shop in one convenient place. 

 
echo
Amazon
1. Amazon's Echo is the cheapest it's ever been
Anyone looking to make their home a little smarter should pick up an Amazon Echo. It can do everything from recite the forecast, to turn off your smart bulbs, to order you pizza. For one day only, Amazon is cutting the Echo's price by $50, making it the cheapest it's ever been.

Amazon Echo, $129.99 (originally $179.99) [$50 off]
cole haan
Cole Haan
2. Save 30% at Cole Haan's summer sale 
Cole Haan is known for making excellent shoes at an affordable price, and this week, you can take an additional 30% off all sale styles with the code "SAVE." The sale includes dress shoes, sneakers, and boat shoes, so regardless of what you're shopping for, you're covered.

Cole Haan Men's 2 ZERØGRAND Unlined Laser Wingtip Oxford, $195.97 (originally $300) [35% off with code "SAVE"]
jet
Jet.com
3. Take 15% off your first 3 orders from Jet.com
Jet.com, the Walmart-owned Amazon competitor, is offering customers 15% off their first three orders. If you haven't used Jet before, this is a great deal since its prices are usually within a few dollars or cents of Amazon's. The 15% discount gives Jet an edge in a lot of cases. The deal is valid for orders of $35 or more, with a maximum savings of $20 — so don't order more than $130 worth of stuff at once.

Get 15% off your first 3 orders at Jet.com using the code "SAVE15."
ministry
Ministry of Supply


4. Save 15% on a dress shirt NASA and MIT helped engineer 
Clothing startup Ministry of Supply has approached the problem of staying cool at the office during the warm months as a welcome challenge. Now in its third design iteration, the Apollo 3 was created after over five years of research and development, with MIT and NASA contributing to the process. The brand is so confident in its product, one of its cofounders ran a half-marathon in one of these suits.

First-time Ministry of Supply customers can currently take advantage of a 15% site-wide discount by using the code "INSIDER0417" at checkout.

Ministry of Supply Apollo 3 Dress Shirt, $97.75 (originally $115) [15% off with code "INSIDER0417"]
backcountry
Backcountry
5. Save up to 50% on clothes, camping gear, and more at Backcountry's big summer sale
If you're planning to spend a lot of time outdoors this summer, check out Backcountry's Fourth of July sale. For a limited time, you can save on popular brands like Patagonia, The North Face, and Arc'teryx.

Check out Backcountry's Fourth of July sale here >>
patagonia
REI
6. Take advantage of REI's summer sale
Another sale we're excited about? REI's Fourth of July blowout. For a limited time only, you can take up to 50% off clothes, hiking boots, camping equipment, and much more.

Check out REI's Fourth of July sale here >>
anker
Amazon
7. Get this car charger for $9
Whether you are embarking on a cross-country road trip this summer, or you spend a lot of time driving, a car charger is a great way to keep your devices fully juiced on the go. Anker's option includes two USB ports, so you can power up your phone and tablet simultaneously. As a bonus, you can currently get it model for $9 — all you need to do is enter the code "ANKR7212" at checkout.

Anker Ultra-Compact 24W 2-Port Car Charger, $8.99 (originally $13.99) [35% off with code "ANKR7212"]
 
If you want to see more from Insider Picks, we're collecting emails for an upcoming newsletter. You'll be the first to hear about the stuff we cover. Click here to sign up .

Disclosure: This post is brought to you by Business Insider's Insider Picks team. We aim to highlight products and services you might find interesting, and if you buy them, we get a small share of the revenue from the sale from our commerce partners. We frequently receive products free of charge from manufacturers to test. This does not drive our decision as to whether or not a product is featured or recommended. We operate independently from our advertising sales team. We welcome your feedback. Have something you think we should know about? Email us at insiderpicks@businessinsider.com.

Read the original article on Insider Picks. Copyright 2017. Follow Insider Picks on Twitter.