Egg coffee? Why this Hanoi specialty has everyone rushing for a caffeine fix
(CNN) — Walk down any street in Vietnam and it quickly becomes apparent this is a country that's crazy about coffee.
From people sipping and sitting on low plastic stools on the sidewalk while gossiping with friends, to those who prefer the pricier, hipster-style cafes popping up around Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi, the need for caffeine is inescapable.
Everyone at Hanoi's humble Cafe Giang however, is after something more than just a caffeine fix.
There've come for "cà phê trúng," or egg coffee, a Hanoi specialty in which a creamy soft, meringue-like egg white foam is perched on dense Vietnamese coffee.
While venues across the city now serve it, this cafe claims to have invented it.
There are hot and cold versions.
The former is served as a a yellow concoction in a small glass. It's consumed with a spoon and tastes almost like a coffee flavored ice cream -- more like a dessert than coffee.
The hot version comes resting in a small dish of hot water to maintain its temperature. The strong coffee taste at the bottom of the cup seeps through the egg -- the yellow layer on top -- and is quite thick and sweet, though not sickly.
A family secret
Cafe Giang is packed on both levels and in the center of the premises, at the bridge between the lower and upper levels, sits Nguyen Van Dao, keeping track of the plentiful orders in a large notebook and giving orders to those serving.
Behind him, there's a modest, open-plan kitchen where a modern, red mixing machine is whirring constantly, whisking up eggs and other parts of the recipe.
Van Dao visibly swells with pride when asked about the cafe's most famous drink.
He says it was his father, Nguyen Van Giang who invented the recipe while working as a bartender at the Sofitel Legend Metropole Hotel in 1946.
At the time, there was a shortage of fresh milk in the country so whisked egg yolk was used as a substitute.
"All the foreigners and the Vietnamese in the hotel liked it," says Van Dao. "So he decided to leave the hotel to start selling egg coffee and create his own brand."
When pushed on the recipe Van Dao begins listing the ingredients while counting on his fingers.
"Egg, condensed milk, coffee powder, some butter, some cheese... but I can't tell you everything, it's a secret recipe" he chuckles.
Mark Lowerson, who runs Street Eats Hanoi, takes tourists from all over the globe on food tours and says egg coffee always goes down well.
"For the vast majority of our clients, the egg coffee experience is a revelation" he says.
"The wow factor is high. When I start describing it, they can't put two and two together. 'Egg' and 'coffee', together? It's pretty hard to get a coherent image of those two ingredients in a cup together. It's always fun.
"I've never had a client not like it. Most devour it and swear they're coming back for one every day they're in Hanoi. Even people who are not normally coffee drinkers can be surprised.
That said, he admits some people find it too rich to finish.
"It is a very decadent way to get a caffeine hit, let's face it."