Why Amazon Is Buying Whole Foods
We all know Amazon is the most powerful retailer online. They have been marching like a conquering army to increased dominance every day. The customer experience they provide, a critical part in consumers' judgment about their satisfaction with retailers today, is second to no one. So why would a company with so much power and potential online, invest over $13 billion to buy Whole Foods, a business that functions virtually entirely in physical stores?

The grocery business is enormous, about $675 billion per year in the U.S. alone. It’s much too big a target for Amazon to ignore. But the industry has been in a somewhat paralyzed state with an uncertain future. On Thursday, Kroger announced disappointing results and a cloudy outlook, causing its stock to drop 18% in one day. It's obvious that online is where grocery shopping has to go for growth but the business has been stubbornly resistant to that change. In January of this year, I wrote in this article why consumers have been so slow to start buying groceries online:

Perishables - consumers want to pick out their own.
Price - in traditional models, consumers do the picking and delivering to their own homes. Replacing those consumers with store employees adds cost. Grocery has cutthroat profit margins and there's no room in their margins for those kinds of costs.
I also wrote that "when you think about who’s best suited to [succeed in online grocery] first, the answer is the technology leader in retail, Amazon." Amazon has experimented with a number of things in grocery, like buying online and picking up instore and new technologies like Amazon Go. But they have not succeeded. Rumors we hear indicate that even Amazon believes the path it has been on in grocery so far has been a failure.

A short time ago, retailers thought of online and stores as two different kinds of retail types. The retail industry coined the phrase "Omnichannel" to describe how they were working to be in both channels simultaneously. They clearly understood the two as distinct. The very name implied that they believed the channels were different and were attempting to be present in all those different places at the same time. Some retailers created different companies for their online business.

Thinking has changed. Retailers understand that consumers think about online and stores being two instruments that work together the way music is played in a two-instrument ensemble. Online and physical stores create one message and service by being together, not two separate things apart.

Now even Amazon has recognized that online alone is not going to work. In order to succeed in grocery, there will have to be a symbiosis of online and physical stores. I believe that not even Amazon knows exactly how it will work but they know that nothing else has succeeded so far and this has to happen. We have seen Amazon recognize the need for physical stores with their bookstores and now we see their recognition that being where customers are includes physical locations.

It’s not clear that the acquisition of Whole Foods by Amazon will be successful. But the need for physical stores combining with online in grocery has clearly arrived and even Amazon sees that it can’t go it alone anymore. It will be interesting to see how the two get integrated and I believe that will be a model for other product classifications to be offered in multiple ways at the same time. Not everything that Amazon has done has been successful. But if anyone can make this work, it’s Amazon.