Abu Dhabi's hottest hotel: Qasr Al Sarab vs. the desert
(CNN) — Inside its grounds, the Qasr Al Sarab hotel has all you'd expect from a high-class UAE resort -- luxury villas, private pools, top-notch restaurants and a fully equipped spa.
Beyond the walls, it's got one feature that few others can match.
Sheer beautiful nothingness.
That's because the Qasr sits perched on the edge of the world. Or at least on the edge of the Empty Quarter -- Rub' al Khali in Arabic -- the planet's largest uninterrupted sand desert.
Stroll out past the hotel's Royal Pavilion and head south: It's just mile after mile of shifting dunes, right up until the dusty highway and fence that marks the Saudi Arabian border.
That remoteness, and the staggering allure of this sun-scorched wilderness, are what make the Qasr one of the best hotels in Abu Dhabi, an emirate not short of five-star contenders.
For the folks running this distant outpost of civilization, it presents a very specific set of problems -- chiefly, how to stop the place being swallowed whole by the desert.
And how not to hurt the very environment that makes it so special.
Shimmering illusion
The Qasr Al Sarab was originally conceived as an escape from the hustle of the UAE's rapidly growing cities, where guests could immerse themselves in a classic Arabian sandscape.
Work began in 2007, a fortress-style structure appearing on the edge of dunes tinted gorgeous hues of red and green by particles of iron and copper.
The finished complex, with 154 guestrooms and 52 villas sprawled over 19,000-plus acres, rises from the desert like a shimmering illusion -- no surprise its name means "mirage."
Not that anyone, says Amer Braik, who heads up the Qasr's environmental and cultural ops, has ever mistaken the resort for a mirage in the eight years since it opened.
Of course they haven't. Save for the occasional Bedouin wandering past, the only reason anyone's made the journey all the way out here is to stay at the resort, or work in it.
Unless guests have access to a helicopter -- UAE President Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan has his own villa here, so it does happen -- that journey is a dull two-hour drive.
Which makes the arrival, along a lantern-lined bridge and through a majestic turreted gate, all the more keenly anticipated.
Within the hotel complex, electric golf buggies ferry bags and guests to sunset-facing rooms and villas strung around seven kilometers of access roads.
The Qasr's main hub resembles a desert palace, especially lit up at night. When the midday sun hits, there are shaded walkways, greenery and cooling channels of burbling water.
Its focal point is a collection of palm-lined swimming pools sculpted to resemble an oasis.
There are also several restaurants, including one designed as a Bedouin camp where diners recline on sofas placed out under the stars as a traditional musician performs on a nearby dune.
All very relaxing. Just as long as you don't start thinking about the effort that goes into preventing this place from being engulfed by the surrounding desert.