Uber Board Unanimously Approves All Holder Report Recommendations; Details Secret Until Tuesday
By Miguel Helft and Alan Ohnsman
Updated June 12, 12:26 PM EDT: Added departure of SVP Emil Michael
After a seven-hour meeting Sunday, Uber's embattled board of directors voted unanimously to approve all of the recommendations made in a report by former U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder and his partner Tammy Albarrán. The report followed a months-long investigation into the company's culture and management and is expected to recommend sweeping changes aimed at remaking Uber's infamous "bro" culture and perhaps shaking up its management ranks.
What the board's vote means for CEO Travis Kalanick isn't yet clear, as the report's recommendations will be kept under wraps until Tuesday, when they will be released to employees. On Monday, the New York Times reported that senior vice president of business Emil Michael had left the company. Uber confirmed his departure, without providing any details.
In a statement, a representative for the board said late Sunday: "The Uber Board met today with Eric Holder and Tammy Albarrán.  The Board unanimously voted to adopt all the recommendations of the Holder Report.  The recommendations will be released to the employees on Tuesday."
Earlier on that day various reports suggested Michael, a controversial executive and close confidant of Kalanick, was being pressured by the board to leave the company. Some of the reports also suggested the board was considering whether Kalanick would take a temporary leave of absence.
Uber has long been known as one of the most aggressive -- and according to critics, unprincipled -- companies in Silicon Valley. While the board and management team frequently defended the company, everything changed in February. That's when former Uber engineer published a withering expose that precipitated the current crisis.
Fowler told how Uber’s human resources department made no attempt to take appropriate action after she reported an incident of sexual harassment by her manager – and then later learned numerous other women had had similar experiences with the same person. The post ultimately revealed a company that had shockingly high tolerance for the worst elements of Silicon Valley bro culture.
Kalanick vowed Uber would investigate Fowler’s claims and tapped Holder to conduct an independent review into workplace conditions at the company and make recommendations.
Last week Uber confirmed that a separate review of 215 complaints of sexual harassment and other types of inappropriate workplace behavior by the law firm Perkins Coie resulted in the firing of at least 20 people. In a curious bit of good news that day, Uber announced that it lured marketing executive Bozoma Saint James away from Apple to be its chief brand officer.
In March, as Uber's internal review was getting under way,  The Information published details of a 2014 visit by Kalanick, Michael and other Uber executives to a karaoke-escort bar during a business trip to Seoul, South Korea. While there women working at the club were identified and selected by male Uber employees based on numbered tags, according to the report, which cited an eyewitness account from Kalanick's ex-girlfriend Gabi Holzwarth.
Nevertheless, the company is still searching for a COO and is also on the hunt for a CFO following the May 31 departure of Gautam Gupta, vice president of finance, who left after four years with the rideshare company to take a position with a San Francisco startup.
A day before news of Gupta’s resignation, Uber fired the former head of its autonomous vehicle R&D effort, Anthony Levandowski, whose actions triggered a high-stakes trade secret lawsuit with Alphabet Inc.’s Waymo. Kalanick was behind the decision in August 2016 to buy Levandowski’s self-driving truck company, Ottomotto LLC, for a reported $680 million.
Among other recent setbacks Uber is contending with, Jeff Jones resigned as president early this year and the U.S. Justice Department has begun a criminal investigation into the company’s use of a software tool known as “Greyball” that helped its drivers avoid detection in parts of the U.S. where the service wasn’t allowed to operate.
Miguel Helft is the San Francisco Bureau Chief for Forbes. Follow him on Twitter at @mhelft.