For GE's Jeff Immelt, Hundreds Of Deals And $575 Billion Didn't Yield A Higher Stock Price
Changing the course for General Electric GE +0.21%, the Titanic-sized industrial and engineering giant, took outgoing chief executive Jeffrey Immelt sixteen years and it cost a fortune.

How much? By the company’s own calculations, during Immelt's tenure, GE made 380 acquisitions that came at a cost of over $175 billion. It further sold off 370 assets worth a total of $400 billion. Thus, GE struck an average of 46 acquisitions and divestitures annually during Immelt’s tenure at a value of $35 billion, churning roughly 9% of its total current enterprise value every year.

This activity came with a cost. The company paid a total of nearly $1.7 billion in M&A fees since 2001, according to data provided to FORBES by Freeman & Co. In the dealmaking bonanza, Immelt made a lasting mark on GE. He doubled down on the company’s engineering strengths, expanded its services capabilities and exited businesses ranging from banking to private equity, plastics, water infrastructure and appliances.

Mega deals included the acquisition of Alstom ’s power business and the assembly of an oil and gas equipment operation that now will merge with drill-bit inventor Baker Hughes BHI +1.72%. Exits ranged from GE’s sprawling and capital consuming financial services operations -- banks across Europe, a U.S. consumer finance arm called Synchrony Financial SYF -0.48%, mortgage insurer Genworth, tens of billions in portfolios of loans and real estate -- to operating businesses such as NBCUniversal, GE Plastics, GE Water, GE Appliances. Immelt even is getting rid of GE’s light bulb business, which holds a lineage that traces to the days of Thomas Edison.

Despite all of the wheeling and dealing, which made Immelt an investment banker’s dream, GE’s stock is poised to end lower than when he assumed the reins in September 2001.

When counting dividends, GE’s stock has returned 27% under Immelt, according to FactSet data, a bit above 1.5% annually, versus a whopping 183% gain by the Dow Jones Industrial Average, or a 7.6% annual return. Versus competitors Emerson Electric EMR +0.70%, Honeywell International HON +0.12%, Siemens and ABB , GE’s performance lags even more. Excluding dividends, GE shares are off roughly 20%.

Faced with these facts, Immelt’s successor John Flannery is now beginning to map out how he will run the $245 billion market capitalization Dow Jones behemoth. Will Flannery be a dealmaker-in-chief at GE’s new Boston headquarters, or will his tenure be about shuttering the deal spigot and focusing on organic growth?

“There is still further simplification that is going to happen,” says Deane Dray, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets, who credits Immelt with divesting 65% of the revenues he inherited while having to shoulder the burdens of a public company with quarterly earnings. ”What is not lost on me is that John Flannery is an M&A guy,” he adds, pointing to the incoming CEO's time as a private equity executive inside GE Capital and his leadership on deals like Synchrony and Alstom.

“There is a pendulum that is swinging in this sector and it is going slowly and steadily in one direction and that is the urge to demerge,” Dray says.

If anything, Immelt’s hard work at GE underscores the challenges of running a conglomerate in today’s market, where investors value simplicity and focus. However, retrenching from GE’s conglomerate structure would mean the dealmaking is only just beginning. With a leading presence in engineering for aviation, power, healthcare and transportation, investors would likely salivate over these businesses as standalone operations.

How could this happen? GE’s oil and gas equipment business may be a blueprint.

In merging the unit with Baker Hughes, Immelt both doubled down and created an exit path for GE. The company is poised to hold a controlling stake in publicly traded GE/Baker Hughes post close, creating an option to hold out hope for an oil recovery with far greater industry scale, or a path towards exit in the vein of Genworth and Synchrony. This type of exit strategy is being matched across the universe of conglomerates and engineering firms.

The mega-merger of Dow Chemicals and DuPont will scale the agriculture and chemicals businesses of the two companies and create a path towards towards a three-part corporate breakup. Ed Breen, the expected CEO of DowDuPont, pioneered this strategy in dealing with the carcass of Tyco after its accounting scandal, successfully splitting and then merging a handful of businesses and eventually getting shareholders back to even.

Industry stock market darling Danaher DHR +0.12% acquired water filtration giant Pall Corporation and then decided to break itself into two public companies. Pentair PNR +0.50%, is doing the same with Tyco’s Swiss-domiciled flow unit. Call this the Ed Breen strategy, another common thread is activist hedge fund investor Trian Partners, which is on the board of Pentair and one of GE’s largest shareholders.

On the flipside, GE’s most alluring attributes, besides the siren call of a conglomerate break-up, are its organic growth prospects.

Instead of leaving a bare cupboard for his successor -Immelt inherited a woefully under-reserved financial outfit from his mentor Jack Welch and an overvalued stock -new CEO Flannery will assume the company’s reins with a record backlog and a market leading footprint in most businesses. GE is also exposed to trends investors are excited about, for instance the growing aviation market or the demographics behind healthcare, transportation, and the consumption of electricity globally. Digital services attached to GE's products now generate real revenues and are growing at a rapid clip.

“I think the company we have today is a vastly simplified portfolio. We're in big markets and have big share positions in those markets. We're deeper, so we have, I'd say, more levers from a standpoint of building both margins and market share. And so, that's the portfolio that John starts with,” Immelt told analysts on Monday. Despite poor stock market returns, it’s hard to argue with Immelt’s point.

GE expects organic growth to be in the mid single digits for the next few years, a forecast that’s kept frustrated investors at bay as concerns surrounding another earnings cut consume analyst questions on company earnings calls. Perhaps it is the business Flannery headed prior to being appointed CEO, which will be an early read on his management philosophy.

As CEO of GE Healthcare, Flannery took an underperformer and increased organic growth to 5% while boosting margins 100 basis points. Is this the foundation for heavy investment in healthcare by GE and an increasing importance within its overall earnings statements, or does it prime the operation for an exit at a multiple that will actually get shareholders cheering?

Though Flannery is keeping his options open, calling for time time to review GE’s businesses, he also has told Wall Street he will act decisively. On Monday, Flannery’s most revealing comments were as follows:

“[W]e have incredible franchises in many of our businesses, big important end markets, aviation, power, renewables, healthcare, transportation, oil and gas. There is a tremendous set of assets. I'm going to do a comprehensive review of that portfolio.

I'll look at each business, I'd say, with a focus on its performance, its growth outlook, the cash, the cost structures, the returns, the competitive environment. We'll review each of those businesses in the portfolio, how it benefits and contributes to the broader company, and it's something you expect us to do with speed and with urgency and with no constraints.”

One thing is clear:

Longtime GE shareholders, nursing dramatic underperformance over the past sixteen years, will be watching closely. So too will Wall Street investment bankers: GE’s dealmaking has made it a dream client and the deconstruction of the 20th century Dow conglomerate sounds like good business.