The good, the bad and the weird of Arroyo Seco Weekend
Weezer performs during Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Sunday, June 25, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)
Weezer performs during Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Sunday, June 25, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG) 
By Vanessa Franko, The Press-Enterprise
POSTED: 06/26/17, 10:26 AM PDT | UPDATED: 14 HRS AGO 0 COMMENTS
Tom Petty and The Heartbreakers perform during the Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Saturday, June 24, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)
Tom Petty and The Heartbreakers perform during the Arroyo Seco Weekend festival on Saturday, June 24, 2017 in Pasadena. (Photo by Sarah Reingewirtz, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG) 
Arroyo Seco Weekend kicked off its inaugural year in Pasadena June 24-25 with a whole lot of heat, music and more at the Brookside Golf Course on the Rose Bowl grounds.

As with any new festival there were some minor kinks, but overall it was a good time filled with jazz, blues, folk and rock and roll. However, that doesn’t mean we can’t make some fun superlatives to commemorate the event.

LOUDEST SING-ALONG: “FREE FALLIN’”

Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers played the “Full Moon Fever” hit pretty early in their headlining set Saturday night and everyone crammed in to watch them sang along. Do we really need to say why? It’s a Southern California location-dropping classic.

•Related: Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers deliver the hits to a packed crowd at Arroyo Seco Weekend

BEST DANCE PARTY: MUMFORD AND SONS

Believe it or not, Arroyo Seco Weekend festivalgoers let loose and rocked out to Mumford and Sons’ “The Cave” on Sunday night. As one attendee twirled around in her lit-up cape, a bunch of people around her began to twirl and sway with her until it erupted into jumping and bounding as the song picked up. Watch some footage of the lit-up moment.

•Related: Mumford & Sons close Arroyo Seco Weekend with joyful sounds for happy fans

MOST COMMON REFRAIN: HOW CLOSE THE FESTIVAL IS

Not only were the many of the fans who attended Arroyo Seco local, so was much of the talent. Artists at Arroyo Seco Weekend were amazed by how close the venue was to their homes (and for some where they grew up). Michael Fitzpatrick from Fitz and the Tantrums mentioned at his set how this was the first gig he could say he could walk to. His co-vocalist, Noelle Scaggs, also mentioned growing up in South Pasadena. Andy Grammer made a remark about his house being very close the festival and Andrew Bird and Dawes also talked about it during their sets, too.

•Related: Arroyo Seco Weekend wasn’t the nightmare festival neighbors feared

THE SPOT YOU WOULD MOST LIKELY BE ASKED TO TAKE A PICTURE OF SOMEONE: TOURNAMENT OF ROSES-STYLE ARCHWAY

Chances are if you walked past the Tournament of Roses archway near the north entrance of the festival, you saw a couple or group of friends lurking around trying to find someone to take their picture underneath the gigantic archway. Then, of course, after taking their photo, they would take a photo for you.

•Related: These photos show you what it’s like to be at Arroyo Seco Weekend


BIGGEST CHANGE NEEDED FOR 2018: DESIGNATED BLANKET AREAS

Not having designated areas for standing room only versus blankets and chairs areas led to a lot trampled blankets and grumpy festivalgoers. Next year, Arroyo Seco Weekend needs to take a (hat) tip from sister event the Stagecoach Country Music Festival and cordon off areas for the groups at the main stage. While being in the pit is fun, having to dance around someone’s blanket and chair set-up is not - there are some things that need boundaries. It would also help for navigating around the main stage crowd.

BEST COSTUMES: WEEZER

On Sunday evening, the delightfully poppy alternative rockers paid tribute to one of Los Angeles’ biggest bands: Guns N’ Roses.

Singer and guitarist Rivers Cuomo came on stage dressed like Axl Rose from the “Paradise City” video, complete with the white leather GNR logo jacket, long red wig, wide blue bandanna, sunglasses and a scarf attached to his pants. Guitarist Brian Bell went for a more understated Slash courtesy of a black top hat and leather jacket.

WEIRDEST MOMENT: THE RAINSTORM

Yes, it rained on Saturday, for just a few minutes. The amount of time people at the festival spent freaking out the rain was longer than the rainstorm itself. However, the rain would have been welcome on Sunday, when temperatures hit triple digits.

MOST CONFUSING ELEMENT: LACK OF SIGNAGE

Trying to navigate your way into the parking lots, out the parking lots or even figuring out which bridge on the grounds was accessible for the stage you were trying to get to was not an easy task due to the lack of signage. It was a little smoother on Sunday, but bring on the signs for 2018.

BEST GUEST APPEARANCE: LOS LOBOS WITH THE SHINS

Arroyo Seco Weekend wasn’t like Coachella with dozens of special guests, but The Shins did bring out Los Lobos.

“They covered our song ‘The Fear’ and just destroyed our version,” Shins singer James Mercer said admiringly before the combined bands did a joint version of that number Sunday night on the Sycamore stage.

STRANGEST ART: THAT RED TUBE

Thought it was a sewage or drain pipe? You weren’t alone. But it was an art installation and maybe the weirdest piece there - and that is saying a lot - called “Red Line.” It was created by Doron Gazit and meant to symbolize the “persistent thread weaving through Earth’s ecological issues,” according to a placard posted near the installation.

•Related: Arroyo Seco Weekend’s art lets you create smells and stare at a strange red tube

BEST USE OF A STAGE AT A MUSIC FESTIVAL JUST TO TELL JOKES: JEFF GOLDBLUM

During Goldblum’s set with his jazz band the Mildred Snitzer Orchestra on Saturday afternoon, the actor played six degrees of separation about himself and made the audience take a “Would You Rather” quiz. He plugged his past and upcoming movies several times throughout the set. And he did Tom Petty trivia that eventually linked back to Goldblum. When he was singing and playing the piano, it was welcome as much as his jokes.

•Related: Alabama Shakes, Jeff Goldblum among musical highlights from Arroyo Seco Weekend’s opening day

BEST SWAG: BAI’S INGREDIENT T-SHIRT

Ever want to let people know just exactly what you are made of? The Bai tent (where the company’s drinks were also handed out for free) gave attendees the opportunity to make their own ingredient shirt - customized to their liking with options such as: confidence, adventure, regret, etc. Judging by the lines at the tent throughout the weekend, it was one of the most coveted free souvenirs.

•Related: Get this free stuff at Arroyo Seco Weekend

COOLEST STAGE: WILLOW

A weird, eclectic mix of jazz, funk and jams. The Willow stage was so popular that, to paraphrase “Jaws,” next year they’re gonna need a bigger tent. One of the best sets was Sunday afternoon with the energetic Con Brio -- a band that even broke into a bit of Donna Summer’s “She Works Hard for the Money.”

•Related: How Arroyo Seco Weekend compares to Coachella, Stagecoach, Desert Trip

MUST-HAVE ACCESSORY: A TODDLER

Arroyo Seco Weekend was a family-friendly festival and there were toddlers and strollers everywhere. Kids under 10 got in for free and many took advantage of celebrating baby’s first festival.

•Related: Arroyo Seco Weekend is the hometown festival you actually want to go to

AGE AIN’T NOTHING BUT A NUMBER AWARD: JOHN MAYALL

The legendary British keyboard player and band leader John Mayall, at 83, is still a fiery player. He sang and played the keys and harmonica, the latter two often at the same time, during his Saturday afternoon set.

BEST SELFIE SPOT: FLOWERS ON YOUR HEAD

Flower crowns may be the must-have fashion accessory at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival for selfies, but at Arroyo Seco Weekend it was #FlowersOnYourHead. Over at the Muir Ranch/JetBlue tent, you could pose with an ornate bouquet of flowers atop your head for your next Facebook profile pic - all for free. Your move, Coachella.

•Related: This is why all of those people have flowers on their heads at Arroyo Seco Weekend

THE SET EVERYONE SHOULD HAVE SEEN AND DIDN’T: WILLIAM BELL

On Saturday evening in the Willows tent, longtime Stax Records soul man William Bell and his 11-piece band tore it up in front of a criminally small crowd, many of them already headed to the Oaks stage for Alabama Shakes and to stake out a spot for Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers after that.

Bell gave it his all and at 77 his voice is terrific as ever, singing hits from his catalog such as “Private Number,” a lovers’ duet, and “You Don’t Miss Your Water,” a song Bell wrote and recorded that has been covered often by everyone from Otis Redding and the Byrds to Peter Tosh and the Wailers.