'He'd already said goodbye': Son of blind pensioner who was rescued from Grenfell Tower after 12 hours desperately waving a cloth for help thought he had died until friend said ‘we’ve seen your dad on TV. He’s alive’

Elpie Bonifacio was pictured waving a cloth from 11th floor as he begged for help
Married pensioner was rescued from the fire 12 hours later and is still in hospital
Son Gordon Bonifacio said the family thought he had died until images surfaced
He said they had 'said their goodbyes' to their father as he was trapped in flat 
By STEPH COCKROFT FOR MAILONLINE
PUBLISHED: 10:04 BST, 20 June 2017 | UPDATED: 11:07 BST, 20 June 2017

The family of a blind pensioner who became known as the 'man in the window' after haunting images emerged of him trapped inside Grenfell Tower thought he was dead until friends spotted him on TV.
Blind Elpie Bonifacio came to symbolise the agony of residents when he was pictured waving a cloth from the 11th floor of the tower in a desperate bid to be rescued from the devastating blaze.
The married pensioner - who is in his 70s and had lived in the flat for 36 years - was eventually rescued from the fire 12 hours later and is still recovering in hospital.
Today, his son Gordon Bonifacio described how their family thought Mr Bonifacio had died - and even said their goodbyes to him over the phone - until the images surfaced on television.
Before that, the family had been talking to Mr Bonifacio on the phone from below, but feared he had perished when the line cut out.
Gordon told Good Morning Britain that he believes those images - which showed his father peering through the window as flames engulfed the tower around him - could have helped to save his life. 
‘We told him to try and get out, but he couldn't, he said the door was too hot,' he told the show.
'At that point, before the images were shown, we had kind of given up. On the phone he had already said his goodbyes. He said that the fire was here, that these were his last words.
'I was on the phone, so was my wife and my brother - we were all distraught, we were panicking. Then the phone lines cut out. That's the point you sort of lose hope.'
But, several hours later, after Gordon had scoured shelters in the area to try and track down his father, his phone went 'crazy' with family and friends saying they had spotted him on television.
'Everyone was getting in touch who was at home watching the images, saying, "Is this him, this is him, this is him",' he told GMB. 
'I wasn’t sure, but everyone else seemed sure, because I wasn’t anywhere near a telly. 
'But I took the images on my phone to one of the policemen nearby. I said: "Look, this is my dad". They got on the radio to the fire brigade, took his name and flat number.
'Still then, we were not 100 per cent sure he was safe until much, much later that at the hospital. That was the point that we were relieved to see him.' 
The devastating fire broke out at the west London block on Wednesday last week, ripping through the 24-storey tower, which stayed alight for several hours afterwards. 
Gordon, who also lives in London, said he had raced to the scene when his mother - who was at work and not at the flat - phoned him to tell him the news.
He added: ‘I was alerted  first at about 2am - friends and family were trying to contact me through the night, but I was eventually contacted by my mum.
'I made my way immediately to the scene. We were actually on the phone to him during that time.
‘He was surprisingly calm. We woke him up because he was asleep - as you would be at that time of the evening. We woke him up said "there's a fire". He could smell the smoke.'
The official death toll of the disaster yesterday rose to 79, with five victims formally identified. Several are still missing and police have warned that there could be more victims.  
Describing the moment Gordon saw his father again, he said: ‘It was such a relief.
'Myself and mum were waiting in the hospital for confirmation that it was actually him, to see him out of there.
'He was in a bad way - he was already in an induced coma because of the smoke inhalation to protect his lungs.'
Gordon said his father - who was taken off his ventilator on Saturday - is 'traumatised' by what has happened but does not know the full extent of the tragedy. 
‘We have spoken to him - he is incoherent and traumatised,' he added. 'I'm not sure if he realises the full extent.
'He is blind, you see, so he might have thought it was just a few storeys. We have told him, but he is very confused.'
Gordon said this mother and brother are being housed in temporary accommodation but that they are still waiting for news of where they will live after. 
On Saturday, Theresa May announced a £5m Grenfell Tower Residents' Discretionary Fund to help victims of the fire.
But Gordon said his family are still unsure of their fate.  
‘As far as permanent accommodation is concerned, we have not been told anything,' he said  said.
'We have spoken to the council, social workers and housing and they will assess his needs. 
‘That was our family home - we all grew up there. My father lived there for 36 years, we all moved in in 1981. That tower was centre to the community.'
He also added that the extent of the fire was 'unbelievable'.
'We were always concerned about fire safety, even back in the day,' he added.
'There have been other fires in the tower in the past which have been isolated to the flat that was in.
'So that’s the surprising thing for me - there have been other fires, but it was just that flat that was affected. For it to spread in this way is unbelievable.'  


Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4620864/Grenfell-man-window-said-goodbye.html#ixzz4kXPXn6uD 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
