The most insidious type of cheating isn't physical — here are 8 signs it could be happening to you
Sheri Meyers calls it an "affair of the heart," or "emotional sex."

You're hardly renting a hotel room together — at least not yet — but you're going out to lunch every weekday and trading intimacies, and when you get home at night, you can't stop thinking about them. Or, maybe you haven't met in person, but you chat online for hours at a time.

Emotional affairs are hard to define exactly. But as Kristin Salaky at INSIDER reports, they're becoming increasingly common — more so even than physical affairs.

Business Insider spoke to Meyers, who is a licensed marriage and family therapist and the author of "Chatting or Cheating," and Michele Weiner-Davis, who is also a licensed marriage and family therapist and the author of "Healing From Infidelity," about some key signs that you could be guilty of emotional infidelity.

Interestingly, Weiner-Davis said that many people in this situation insist they weren't looking to cheat — it just happened. But in reality, the road to infidelity is a "slippery slope," she said. "Every daily decision is bringing them closer and closer to moving from emotional infidelity to perhaps even a physical affair."

View As: One Page Slides


You find that it's easier to open up to the other person than it is to open up to your partner
In short, Weiner-Davis said, "that's not a good sign."

Even if you do have better communication with the other person, she added, there's probably a good reason why: You don't have to talk to that person about kids, or finances, or all the other un-sexy topics you talk to your partner about.

So instead of pursuing that freer relationship with the other person, "what needs to happen is rather than using [the other person] as the outlet, you need to get help so that you have better communication at home."

You're sexually attracted to the other person
"You are drawn to this person," Meyers said, "whether you act on it or not."

It's really a combination of sexual chemistry and emotional comfort: "There's this underlying sexual energy and chemistry and you begin to believe that your friend understands you and gets you more than your partner does."


You wouldn't behave the same way toward the other person in front of your partner
You wouldn't behave the same way toward the other person in front of your partner
Flickr/Bubble Fishh
When Weiner-Davis talks to couples about emotional infidelity, she tells them:

"You have to ask yourself when you're having interactions with someone meaningful to you: If your spouse [or partner] were standing right beside you, would you be doing what you're doing? Would you be saying what you're saying?
"And if the answer's no, then there's something not right about that relationship."
 

You're secretive about your communication with the other person
According to Meyers, a major warning sign is when "you're starting to become secretive about how much time you're thinking about, spending with, interacting with this friend."

If your partner walks in while you're texting the other person, "you suddenly put the phone down."

In some cases, Meyers added, "you're also checking messages constantly to see if there's any contact — longing for contact. And you're thinking about and daydreaming about this person more and more and more."

You compare the other person to your partner
Somewhere along the way to an emotional affair, you may find yourself "starting to compare and contrast all the differences that stand out between your partner and your friend," Meyers said.

"Your partner's worth is diminishing as your friend's worth increases, and you start imagining that your friend could be a better mate and give you happiness — the happiness you long for that you're not feeling with your partner."

You think about the other person regularly, to the point that it's distracting
You think about the other person regularly, to the point that it's distracting
Strelka Institute for Media, Architecture and Design/Flickr
Sure, you're not actually doing anything with the other person. But "it's a danger sign because there's an indication that there's a yearning," Weiner-Davis said.

"I don't think there's anything wrong with fantasizing about other people — I think that's natural," she added.

The problem? "If it happens more persistently, then it often prompts people to feel that they have to take action" by taking the affair to the next level.

You rationalize the relationship with the other person in your own head
Meyers has heard it all. People tell themselves, "Oh, we're just friends" or, "It's not like we're having sex; it's just innocent flirting," or, "Oh, this is my coworker. That's all, nothing more."

"You're lying to yourself," Meyers said, "and the people around you to justify this."

Weiner-Davis has heard people rationalize the relationship with: "I'm entitled to my privacy" or, "I don't ask my spouse what they're doing over every lunch and they shouldn't ask me what I'm doing over every lunch."

"I think that people do justify that [relationship], even when they have that little gnawing sense inside that's something's not completely right," Weiner-Davis said.

You get defensive when your partner confronts you about the other person
You get defensive when your partner confronts you about the other person
TrinDiego/flickr
"Let's face it," Weiner-Davis said.

"If this were not a problematic relationship, and your spouse was saying, 'I feel really uncomfortable that you go out to dinner regularly with this woman at work,' in a healthy, loving relationship you talk about it and you come up with some sort of compromise."

Maybe you invite your partner along to dinner, for example. Ultimately, "you take the other person's feelings into consideration."

"But when something is up and you become super defensive about it, it's really time to take a step back," she said.

Think about that line from Shakespeare: The lady doth protest too much. Would you really be getting so upset if you knew you'd done nothing wrong? 