LA County leaders approve $30 billion budget, calling it prudent, ‘moral’
Los Angeles County supervisors Monday unanimously approved a $30.1 billion budget for the upcoming fiscal year that includes millions to fight homelessness, shore up staffing for some social service departments, provide medical care for the poor, and save for a rainy day.
The new budget, supervisors said, not only strengthens safety net services but increases the workforce. It folds in an estimated $259?million that the county hopes to generate as a result of voter-approved Measure H funding, the quarter-cent sales tax that begins in October to prevent and help people who are homeless.

“The budget adopted today by the Board of Supervisors is about far more than numbers and line items,” Los Angeles County CEO Sachi Hamai said in a statement. “It represents our commitment to improving the lives of those struggling on the margins of society, while also embracing the kind of strong fiscal accountability that recently led to our best long-term credit ratings in more than a decade. This budget is a reflection of our deeply held values.”

• RELATED STORY: Homelessness surges by 23 percent in LA County

Hamai said the proposed budget came in at $137 million more than the current fiscal year, but there are some losses, including special district funding, she added.

In addition to almost $2?billion for the Sheriff’s Department, the budget includes:

• $96 million to implement Measure A, known as the Safe, Clean Neighborhood Parks and Beaches measure.

• $45 million for 220 new social workers and 107 support staff to reduce Department of Children and Family Services caseloads.

• $25 million for foster care system improvements.

• $8 million to operate a new psychiatric inpatient unit at Olive View-UCLA Medical Center.

• $3 million for the newly established Office of Immigrant Affairs within the Department of Consumer and Business Affairs. The office provide legal services to county immigrants facing deportation proceedings and is the first direct result of approving a budget under President Trump, whose hard-line stance on illegal immigration, his goal to strike down the Affordable Care Act, and his focus on military spending created ripples of uncertainty for federal funding to the county.


Still, with 886 new positions funded, the county’s workforce comes to 109,881 employees. Los Angeles County is the largest local government body in the nation.

• RELATED STORY: LA County leaders make visit to Washington D.C. to ask Trump Administration ‘to hear our story’

The county’s spending has been historically praised for its conservative approach compared with other jurisdictions. Supervisor Kathryn Barger, the only Republican on the five-member board, praised Hamai and her team for developing a balanced budget that addresses the county’s priorities while still taking a fiscally cautious approach to the use of taxpayer funds, she said.

“This dedication to fiscal prudence will be especially important as we begin to allocate Measure H revenue to implement homeless strategies in the most effective and efficient manner,” Barger said, adding she also was pleased that the budget allocates $27.4 million for a rainy day fund. She called it vital to “ensuring the continued provision of services in the face of unanticipated economic challenges.”

Supervisor Mark-Ridley-Thomas said the county was in the strongest position it has been in the past decade.

“People of L.A. County are being well-served by that in terms of the strength, solvency, and prudence,” he said.

Earlier this month, Moody’s cited the county’s “strong and stable financial position” to upgrade its rating, meaning the budget team is potentially saving the county millions of dollars in interest expenses.

Ridley-Thomas gave credit to voters who helped pass Measure H in March as well as the board for staying focused.

“We’d be in tougher shape if it were not for the people of L.A. County stepping forward with Measure H,” he said. “The entire board was engaged in an unprecedented way.”

Supervisor Hilda Solis, who introduced motions to supplement the arts and consumer protections, said in a statement the budget will help the county’s most vulnerable.

“This budget is truly reflective of our values and ideals as a county, and I am confident it fits the needs of the communities I serve,” she said.

Supervisor Janice Hahn said she was pleased the board passed the motion to dedicate $1.46 million for a first-of-its-kind mobile stroke unit pilot program in Los Angeles County, which will help diagnose and treat stroke patients in the field.

“A budget is a moral document,” Hahn said in a statement. “It outlines a government’s values and priorities.”

The new fiscal year starts on July 1.