Smarter Banking with Personalized Service: An IT Transformation

Since the birth of institutional banking in Renaissance Italy, traditional behaviors have dominated the industry. Some modernization has occurred in recent years, but it will seem trivial compared to the changes coming soon.

For years, introducing digital services in a piecemeal fashion allowed banks to retain the status quo. Now, however, disruption is occurring, according to thought leaders like Brett King, technology futurist and author of Bank 3.0. He was among the first to spot the shift from a business-centric to a consumer-centric banking model, noting this in his book’s sub-title: Why Banking Is No Longer Somewhere You Go, But Something You Do.

It’s not surprising that banks have resisted this paradigm shift, says King, given their bedrock belief that their business runs on “secure firewalls and a compliance mindset.” Consequently, they’ve operated in a manner “counter to how any other industry engages with customers in the digital space,” he asserts.

While a vibrant digital marketplace is emerging in every direction, consumer banking has maintained strict service limitations and little personalization. But now, some banks are sharply changing this approach. For the first time, they are adopting a consumer-centric outlook to remain competitive to customers with new needs and preferences.

Providing the omni-channel banking this shift requires, however, presents challenges. It demands excellent capabilities to support e-banking, tele-banking, remote banking, mobile banking and mobile marketing, along with brick-and-mortar branches.

Meeting these expanding needs is only possible through purpose-built solutions generated by strong strategic partnerships, utilizing Big Data analytics and a true open-platform IT infrastructure. Huawei, the world’s largest telecommunications equipment manufacturer, is a leader in providing these solutions to financial institutions making this critical transformation.

“Huawei is committed to working with our customers and partners in the financial industry to reshape industry-specific IT architecture that will accelerate business transformation and meet evolving customer needs,” said Kenny Liu, President of the Financial Services Sector, Enterprise BG, Huawei.

On-Demand, All-Online

Innovators such as CMBC expect the future of banking services to be real-time, on-demand, all-online, and socially-engaged, not to mention customized to the individual and conducted via mobile devices. The new model leverages powerful information technology to deliver a dazzling array of services. Thus, foot-dragging in the IT department of any would-be world-class bank is anathema now.

Tech-driven partnerships, such as the alliance between Huawei and China Merchants Bank (CMBC), are showing what’s possible in an advanced consumer-centric model. Working with Huawei, CMBC has revamped its operational management to integrate backstage platforms and resource sharing in order to create a process that, according to a CMBC spokesperson, is capable of “fast business deployment, fast product development and fast supporting business development,” complemented by a complete mobile Internet finance service.

This model dramatically increases the speed and accuracy of bank operations. For example, historical detail queries have been limited to a single year of records, but this model allows queries to look back seven years or more. The metrics on forecasting are similarly impressive; customer forecasts on small and micro credit could improve conversion rates by a factor of 40. Likewise, the error rate of contingent financial asset forecasting could be cut by half.

Tapping Huawei’s agile ICT technologies in cloud integration, Big Data and other core areas allowed CMBC to make dynamic changes in their communication, service patterns and sales outreach—creating new value for their customers.

Going Digital

Banks are rapidly implementing digital service channels that improve customer engagement while reducing costs. To cite just one example, HSBC recently committed $2 billion to fund digital transformation initiatives designed to improve customer service.

Don’t think of conventional ATMs and existing mobile apps, however; the new innovations are far more versatile. For example, Huawei’s Virtual Teller Machine (VTM) Remote Banking Solution has been termed a “bank in a box,” and operates like a 24/7 mini-branch at a fraction of the expense in almost any location (it can be easily adapted into most existing terminals). Using voice and video communication, Huawei’s VTM automates more than 90 percent of bank counter services, doing everything from issuing credit cards to providing face-to-face financial counseling. It increases customer coverage and happiness along with the bank’s profits.

Send in the Cloud

Another trend is accompanying the stampede to create new digital channels; the financial industry is migrating to cloud platforms to eliminate costly internal mainframes and traditional IT systems that are notoriously hard to scale.

Strategic partnerships are key to a successful cloud strategy. Huawei’s Financial Cloud Solution offers banks unprecedented global access, transparency and agility to meet dynamic business needs. Using a customer-tailored, OpenStack architecture, this Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) platform can provide all core banking services securely and conveniently. And it works seamlessly with mainstream banking software; Huawei even formed a strategic partnership with Infosys in 2014 to bring customers full cloud interconnection with Finacle, a leading financial application.

The Move to Mobile

King believes that “mobile will change the context of banking including where and how a consumer conducts business.” He gives the example of home mortgage financing: “The process of securing a mortgage,” King asserts, “becomes much different when the shopping for the mortgage is done online significantly before a customer enters a branch—if they do so at all.”

Banking experts note that the consumer-centric model also means engaging in social-media dialogue with customers and prospects. Just as other industries (like retail) have done, banking will need to exploit the listening-post benefit that social media provides. When a brand like CMBC can exceed market expectations for service, this can lead to advocacy of the brand—and referrals for new business.

Today, as in 15th-century Florence, there’s still a critical need for banks to earn and keep customers’ trust, and social media is both a source and an indicator of that trust.

These scenarios are based on technological advancements emerging right now. In its partnership with Huawei, CMBC focuses on customer experience as the point where innovation yields the greatest benefit, as all progress depends on how consumers adapt to the new technology. Personalized, customized service with less in-person interaction with customers might seem a contradiction, but for CMBC it is more than viable.

It’s possible, in other words, for banks to function as mobile apps that exist only in users’ devices, rather than in brick-and-mortar branches. Personalized services will provide the customer with something like a 24-hour private wealth manager, through their handheld device.

As CMBC builds the infrastructure to realize this vision, Huawei supports them with a full range of ICT technologies.

“While Huawei has already established several best practices in areas such as cloud, Big Data and innovative service channels for finance, we will continue to innovate to provide customers with open, resilient, safe and cost-efficient IT platforms, intelligent and comprehensive data systems, and agile service channels,” said Liu.

It makes perfect sense that the birthplace of banking was an environment so rich in architectural detail and beauty as Renaissance Florence, where the Medici Palace still displays its twin-arched windows and elaborate cornices. But the separation of banking from its traditional physical setting is now at hand, opening the way for advanced services that will elevate the fortunes of the consumer—and the service providers that prove themselves most agile, innovative and customer-centric. 