Louisville bourbon bars: Master distiller Marianne Barnes' favorites
(CNN) — Don't let anyone boss you around about bourbon.
"Drink it however you like it," says master distiller Marianne Barnes.
"Bourbon purists would shame you for putting bourbon in Coke, but if that's how you're going to start to develop an appreciation for the flavors, maybe you start there and then move into some craft cocktails, maybe try a nice old fashioned, and move into a neat pour from there," she says.
Barnes, 30, knows a thing or two about learning to like bourbon.
When she landed a co-op at distilling powerhouse Brown-Forman in 2009, she didn't have a taste for it. She had expected to end up working in bio diesel or fuel additives once she earned her chemical engineering degree from the University of Louisville.
But she fell in love with bourbon and the industry and stayed on after she graduated, rising to become a master taster at Brown-Forman, the company behind Woodford Reserve, Old Forester, Jack Daniel's and many other spirits and wines.
In 2015, she made a big splash in bourbon circles when she left Brown-Forman to take on the role of master distiller at Castle & Key, a new distillery that's slated to open to the public this summer in the historic Old Taylor Distillery facility near Frankfort, Kentucky.
The move made Barnes the first female master distiller in Kentucky since Prohibition.
"I'm not the only one anymore, but I hope that I was able to open some doors and get people thinking that it was old-fashioned and about time," Barnes says.
Barnes is also a partner and part-owner of Castle & Key. The new distillery has been putting away bourbon for several months now, but the aging process takes time, and they're not going to rush it. It'll be ready in about four years.
So while it's aging, Castle & Key has plans to debut with gin late this summer.
But it's bourbon that dominates Kentucky Derby season drinks, so CNN asked Barnes to recommend some of her favorite bourbon bars in Louisville, where the most exciting two minutes in sports takes place the first Saturday in May.
The Silver Dollar
Modeled on the Bakersfield, California honky tonks of the 1950s, this Frankfort Avenue spot serves traditional working class dishes with a modern spin and is serious about whiskey.
There are more than 400 varieties of the drink available, about 200 of which are Kentucky straight bourbons. Craft cocktails are also on the menu, including a mint julep made with Four Roses Single Barrel.
While bourbon must be made in the United States, it's not made exclusively in Kentucky. Still, the state produces 95% of the world's supply.
It must be made from a grain mixture that's at least 51% corn and be aged in new, charred oak barrels. There are also some proof requirements for distilling, aging and bottling bourbon.
The Silver Dollar is on the city's Urban Bourbon Trail, a collection of bars and restaurants that stock at least 50 bourbons. Guests with paper or electronic Urban Bourbon Trail passports get stamps at participating venues toward Bourbon Trail swag.
The Silver Dollar, 1761 Frankfort Ave., Louisville