'Evil borne of hatred': Theresa May slams 'sickening' attack on Muslims in Finsbury Park Mosque horror as 'distraught' Jeremy Corbyn is overcome with emotion

Speaking outside No 10, Mrs May described incident as 'attack on Muslims' 
PM acknowledged lone wold attack came at a 'difficult time' for British capital
But she hailed London as an 'extraordinary city of extraordinary people'
Came as Jeremy Corbyn visited scene, which is in his north London constituency
May's initial response came less than four hours after the attack began  
By Tim Sculthorpe, Deputy Political Editor For Mailonline and Steph Cockroft for MailOnline and Anthony Joseph for MailOnline and Kate Ferguson, Political Correspondent For Mailonline
PUBLISHED: 08:07 BST, 19 June 2017 | UPDATED: 20:19 BST, 19 June 2017

Theresa May today condemned the 'sickening' Finsbury Park terror attack and vowed to 'drive out this evil' after she met faith leaders inside the local mosque in the aftermath of the atrocity.
The Prime Minister travelled to north London shortly after addressing the nation after Britain suffered its fourth terror attack in just four months.
She was quickly whisked to Finsbury Park Mosque to meet with Imam Mahmoud and community leaders this afternoon after she faced fierce criticism for her slow response to the Grenfell Tower disaster last week.
The PM said the incident is 'every bit as sickening' as the recent atrocities in London and Manchester.
After meeting faith leaders at the mosque, she said: 'The terrible terrorist attack which took place last night was an evil borne out of hatred and it has devastated a community
Theresa May, pictured today alongside Met Police Commissioner Cressida Dick, spoke with faith leaders at Finsbury Park Mosque following last night's terror attack
Theresa May (second left) and Met Commissioner Cressida Dick (centre) met with local faith leaders including Mohammed Kozbar (left) a, chair of the mosque, Rabbi Herschel Gluck, president of Shomrim in Stamford Hill (right) with Toufik Kacimi, chief executive of the Muslim Welfare House (second right) at Finsbury Park Mosque today 
Theresa May visited the Finsbury Park Mosque this afternoon after condemning a terrorist attack on Muslims there as 'every bit as sickening' as other assaults on Britain
Mrs May also acknowledged that this morning's attack - which police believe was carried out by a lone wolf - falls at a 'difficult time' for London

Kensington Council chief REFUSES to say if he'll resign over...
Let's go! David Davis heads to Brussels for the first round...
It's ALREADY illegal: Hammond says public inquiry and...
This sickening attack will thrill ISIS: they long to spark a...
Cheering terror suspect ran over crowd in Finsbury Park......
'I am pleased to have been here today to see the strength of that community coming together, all faiths united in one desire to see extremism and hatred of all sorts driven out of our society.
'There is no place for this hatred in our country today and we need to work together as one society, one community, to drive it out, this evil which is affecting so many families.'
Grenfell victims to be rehomed in borough 
Theresa May today received fresh assurances that victims of the Grenfell Tower fire will be re-homed within the same or neighbouring borough.
Number 10 said they were told reports those who lost their homes in the fatal blaze would have to move hundreds of miles away to cities scattered across Britain if they wanted to keep a roof over their head ‘were false’.
And they said that by the end of the day the government will have the final figures for the number of tower blocks across the UK which will be subject to extra fire checks in the wake of the disaster.
The update came this evening after Mrs may chaired the third meeting Grenfell Tower Recovery Taskforce.
Number 10 said the Lord Chief Justice is expected to appoint a judge to oversee the independent Inquiry ‘in the next couple of days’, and the PM ‘reiterated her commitment that residents would be consulted on the terms of reference for the inquiry before they are finalised’.
Mrs May will receive daily reports on what is being done to help and support those who were left homeless and lost relatives in the fire.
It comes after victims and locals living near the north Kensington tower block reacted with fury to the government’s flat-footed response to the crisis. 
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn - who represents the area as Islington North MP - was in the mosque at the same time but it is not clear whether the politicians were in the same meeting. 
But despite rushing to the mosque quickly following the attack, Mrs May was heckled as she left it.
A man was heard shouting: 'Mrs May, why are you so quick today? Prime Minister, have you got a faster taxi?' 
Mrs May's response was in stark contrast to her leaden reaction to the Grenfell fire disaster which forced her to apologise on Saturday.
The Premier was given a deeply hostile reception at a visit to Kensington on Friday and had to be evacuated at speed from a church by her police officers. 
Speaking on the steps of Number 10 on another bloody day for the capital, the Prime Minister described the incident as 'an attack on British Muslims' which sought to destroy one of the country's 'fundamental freedoms'.
In her Downing Street speech, Mrs May also acknowledged that this morning's attack - which police believe was carried out by a lone wolf - falls at a 'difficult time' for London, in the wake of the London Bridge terror attack and the 'unimaginable' Grenfell Tower tragedy.
But she hailed London as an 'extraordinary city of extraordinary people' which was 'determined never to give in to hate'.
Mrs May's address to the nation came after she issued her first response to the attack before 4am - less than four hours after the incident took place. 
Her speech came as Jeremy Corbyn visited the scene of the attack - which is close to his home in his north London constituency - where he was overcome with emotion as he talked to residents.
Theresa May has condemned the Finsbury Park terror attack as 'every bit as sickening' as the other incidents which have rocked Britain in recent months
Mrs May addressed the nation in the aftermath of a terror attack for the fourth time in as many months as she admitted London was going through a 'difficult' period 
Mrs May said: 'This attack targeted the ordinary and the innocent going about their ordinary lives, this time British Muslims as they left a mosque after breaking their fast at this sacred time of year.
'This was an attack on Muslims near their place of worship and like all terrorism in whatever form it shares the same fundamental goal - it seeks to drive us apart and break the the precious bonds of solidarity and citizenship that we share in this country. 
'At the heart of that bond is a belief in the fundamental freedoms and liberties we all cherish - freedom of speech, the freedom to live how we choose and - yes - the freedom to practice religion in peace
'We will not let this happen. It is a reminder that terrorism, extremism and hatred take many forms and our determination to tackle them must be the same whoever is responsible.' 
Jeremy Corbyn arrived at the scene today (pictured) to comfort his constituents. Mr Corbyn, who is MP for the area, is due at a prayer service later
The Labour leader wept as he comforted constituents on his home patch today just hours after the terrorist attack near Finsbury Park mosque 

Mrs May then referred to the other horrors which have taken place in London over recent weeks, describing how Londoners had shown 'resolve' through the adversity. 
'Today's attack falls at a difficult time in the life of this city following on from London Bridge two weeks ago and of course the unimaginable tragedy of Grenfell Tower this week,' she continued. 
'But what we have seen throughout - whether in the heroism of the ordinary citizens who fought off the attackers at London Bridge, the unbreakable resolve of the residents in Kensington, or, this morning, the spirit of the community who apprehended the attacker, is that this is an extraordinary city of extraordinary people. 
'It is home to a multitude of communities that together make London one of the greatest cities on earth - diverse, welcoming, vibrant, compassionate, confident and determined never to give in to hate.
'There are the values that define this city.' 
Mrs May added that extra police resources had already been deployed to 'reassure communities' while police would continue to assess the security needs of mosques 'and provide any additional resources where needed'.  
The Prime Minister - who made the statement after chairing a meeting of the Government's emergency Cobra meeting - added that police believed the suspect was acting alone when he mowed down the group of Muslims close to the mosque.
Mr Corbyn said he was horrified by the 'cruel' attack in his constituency, which saw a white man drive at a group of Muslims giving first aid to an ill man 
The Islington North MP said he was already working with community leaders at Muslim Welfare House in response to the attack 
Chairman of City Sikhs and co-chair of Faiths Forum London, Jasvir Singh, was in the room with Theresa May at the mosque.
He told MailOnline: 'She was mainly reassuring us that all will be done to protect the community.
'She sat and listened to the concerns of the different faith groups. She did a lot of listening and it was great that she came.' 
Mr Corbyn, who lives close to the scene, said he became aware of the incident very quickly as police responded early on Monday.'
One man died and 10 people were injured after the driver of a white van ploughed into worshippers outside the Muslim Welfare House, near the Finsbury Park Mosque in north London.
The Leader of the Opposition praised the emergency services for their 'very quick and very timely' response after the driver was arrested at the scene.
Asked if the suspected terrorist attack was being treated as seriously as others, he told BBC News on Monday: 'I'm treating it absolutely as seriously as any other attack.
'This was a van driven into a crowd of people who were tending a man who was already injured and they were coming home from night-time prayers in the mosque.
'It's Ramadan and it's perfectly normal, and eight people have been injured, some of them I understand extremely seriously, and, as I see it, this is a terror on the streets and it's a terror of the people on the streets, in the communities I'm very proud to represent in Parliament, and that's why I'm here today.'
One person has been killed and ten others injured after someone drove a van at Muslim worshippers outside Finsbury Park mosque. Forensic officers were combing the scene today (pictured) 
Forensic officers in  blue overalls were at the scene of the terror attack this morning, where they pitched a forensics tent as they combed the area for clues
The Prime Minister was slammed last week for taking too long to meet victims of the Grenfell Tower fire, meeting only emergency service staff on the first day.
While she has since met victims of the disaster and apologised for the response of public officials on the ground, the row was another damaging blow to her authority after the disastrous election. 
This morning, Home Secretary Ms Rudd told Sky News that the incident was being treated as terror.
She said: 'We have again woken up to another terrible incident in London where a man has taken hold of a van and driven it into a group of innocent people.
'There was one fatality we know about and a number of casualties.
'The police are treating it as a terrorist incident.'
Moment man is arrested after van ploughs into crowd
Arrest: This is the moment the Finsbury Park terror suspect was cuffed after being hauled to the ground and pinned down by worshippers who kept him being attacked before the police arrived
Footage shows the alleged driver of the van being arrested at the scene and bundled into a police van - he screamed 'kill me' in the hope witnesses to his Islamophobic attack would seek retribution
After the attack the man was reportedly tackled by civilians, and a crowd of angry bystanders gave him to police
Uniformed police officers stood guard after the terror attack in Finsbury Park which happened late last night 
Sajid Javid comforts woman who says she no longer feels safe
Ms Rudd said there was not yet any information about the attacker but said the police operation would  move at high speed in the coming hours.
Asked why it took so many hours to declare it as terrorism, she said: 'We know the police were on hand immediately.
'We know they have treated it immediately as a suspected terrorist event.
'That is the normal procedure.' 
Ms Rudd said the Government remained committed to ensuring the safety of everyone.
The Home Secretary outlined existing policies and grants available to protect places of worship. 
She said: 'Londoners have been hit by a series of attacks and have been nothing short of heroic.'
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, who represents the Finsbury Park area as an MP, has announced he will attend prayers at the mosque later 
Muslims pray in Finsbury Park after witnessing attack
London Mayor Sadiq Khan urged people to 'remain calm and vigilant'.
He said: 'We don't yet know the full details, but this was clearly a deliberate attack on innocent Londoners, many of whom were finishing prayers during the holy month of Ramadan.
'While this appears to be an attack on a particular community, like the terrible attacks in Manchester, Westminster and London Bridge it is also an assault on all our shared values of tolerance, freedom and respect.
'The situation is still unfolding and I urge all Londoners to remain calm and vigilant. Please report anything suspicious to the police, but only call 999 in an emergency.
'The Met have deployed extra police to reassure communities, especially those observing Ramadan.'
A 48-year-old man has been arrested after the van, which was hired from south Wales, mounted the pavement and veered into a congregation outside the Muslim Welfare House, near Finsbury Park Mosque, shortly after they finished Ramadan evening prayers.
Heroic bystanders wrestled the suspect, who was clean-shaven with curly hair and wore a white t-shirt, to the floor and pinned him down until officers arrived, at around 12.20am. 

UNITED IN FURY: HOW MAY AND CORBYN RESPONDED TO THE FINSBURY PARK TERROR ATTACK 
Theresa May appeared in Downing Street today to make her fourth response to a terrorist outrage in as many months.
Jeremy Corbyn meanwhile responded on the streets of Finsbury Park, which he represents as MP for Islington North.
This is how they responded: 
THERESA MAY 
'Today we come together - as we have done before – to condemn this act and to state once again that hatred and evil of this kind will never succeed.  
'This morning we have seen a sickening attempt to destroy those freedoms; and to break those bonds of citizenship that define our United Kingdom.
'Today's attack falls at a difficult time in the life of this city, following on from the attack on London Bridge two weeks ago – and of course the unimaginable tragedy of Grenfell Tower last week, on which I will chair another meeting of Ministers and officials later today. 
'It is home to a multitude of communities that together make London one of the greatest cities on earth.
'Diverse, welcoming, vibrant, compassionate, confident and determined never to give in to hate.
'These are the values that define this city. These are the values that define this country. These are the values that this government will uphold. these are the values that will prevail.'
JEREMY CORBYN  
'I'm treating it absolutely as seriously as any other attack.
'This was a van driven into a crowd of people who were tending a man who was already injured and they were coming home from night-time prayers in the mosque.
'It's Ramadan and it's perfectly normal, and eight people have been injured, some of them I understand extremely seriously, and, as I see it, this is a terror on the streets and it's a terror of the people on the streets, in the communities I'm very proud to represent in Parliament, and that's why I'm here today.'
Mr Corbyn added: 'The only way to deal with this kind of issue is communities coming together and this is a very multi-faith community - Christians, Jewish, Muslims, Hindu, Buddhist, all live around here.
'This is a microcosm of a community working together.
An attack on a mosque, an attack on a synagogue, an attack on a church is actually an attack on all of us. We have to protect each others' faith, each others' way of life, and that's what makes us a strong society and community.' 

Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4617070/Home-Secretary-Amber-Rudd-praises-heroic-Londoners.html#ixzz4kXHDPy8N 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook